
                        SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
                     BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY

                              BULLETIN 64

                 THE MAYA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN YUCATAN
                     AND NORTHERN BRITISH HONDURAS

                                  BY

                          THOMAS W. F. GANN

                      [Illustration: decoration]

                              WASHINGTON
                      GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                 1918




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL


                              WASHINGTON, D. C., _November 4, 1916_.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith the manuscript of a memoir
entitled "The Maya Indians of Southern Yucatan and Northern British
Honduras," by Thomas W. F. Gann, and to recommend its publication as a
bulletin of the Bureau of American Ethnology.

      Very respectfully,

                                                  F. W. HODGE,
                                            _Ethnologist-in-Charge_.

  Hon. CHARLES D. WALCOTT,
      _Secretary, Smithsonian Institution_.




CONTENTS


        PART 1. CUSTOMS, CEREMONIES, AND MODE OF LIFE

                                                              Page

  Introduction                                                  13

  Habitat                                                       14

  Personal characteristics                                      15

      Dress                                                     18

      Industrial activities                                     20

          Agriculture                                           20

          Procuring food; cooking                               21

          Hunting                                               23

          Fishing                                               25

          Construction of houses and furniture                  26

          Pottery making                                        28

          Boat building                                         28

          Spinning and weaving                                  29

          Minor industries                                      30

              Tobacco curing                                    30

              Basket and mat weaving                            30

  Social characteristics                                        32

      Villages                                                  32

      Marriage and children                                     32

      Drunkenness                                               34

      Chiefs                                                    35

      Diseases and medicines                                    36

      Games                                                     39

      Religion                                                  40


        PART 2. MOUND EXCAVATION IN THE EASTERN MAYA AREA

  Introduction                                                  49

      Classification of the mounds                              49

      Ancient inhabitants of the region                         51

          Physical appearance                                   51

          Dress                                                 52

          Weapons                                               52

          Houses                                                53

          Arts                                                  53

          Musical instruments                                   54

          Food                                                  55

          Spinning and weaving                                  55

          Games                                                 56

          Religion                                              56

          Chronology                                            58

  Description of mounds                                         59

      Mound No. 1                                               59

      Mound No. 2                                               63

      Mound No. 3                                               65

      Mound No. 4                                               67

      Mound No. 5                                               70

      Mound No. 5 A                                             72

      Mound No. 6                                               74

      Mound No. 6 A                                             78

      Mound No. 7                                               79

      Mound No. 8                                               80

      Mound No. 9                                               83

      Mound No. 10                                              86

      Mound No. 11                                              90

      Mound No. 12                                              92

      Mound No. 13                                              99

      Mound No. 14                                              99

      Mound No. 15                                             103

      Mound No. 16                                             105

      Mound No. 17                                             109

      Mound No. 18                                             111

      Mound No. 19                                             112

      Mound No. 20                                             112

      Mound No. 21                                             114

      Mound No. 22                                             115

      Mound No. 23                                             116

      Mound No. 24                                             118

      Mound No. 25                                             120

      Mound No. 26                                             123

      Mound No. 27                                             124

      Mound No. 28                                             124

      Mound No. 29                                             125

      Mound No. 30                                             125

      Mound No. 31                                             128

      Mound No. 32                                             129

      Mound No. 33                                             130

      Mound No. 34                                             132

      Mound No. 35                                             133

      Mound No. 36                                             134

      Mound No. 37                                             134

      Mound No. 38                                             134

      Mound No. 39                                             135

      Mound No. 40                                             136

      Mound No. 41                                             137

  Two painted stucco faces from Uxmal                          140

  Authorities cited                                            143

  Index                                                        145




ILLUSTRATIONS


                      PLATES                                      Page

    1. Group of Santa Cruz Indians                                  18

    2. Maya girls fishing                                           26

    3. Fish drying on one of the cays off the coast of Yucatan      26

    4. Maya Indian houses. _a._ Leaf-thatched house,
       _b._ Indian house on Rio Hondo                               26

    5. Maya woman, 105 years old, spinning cotton                   29

    6. Maya loom                                                    29

    7. Sketch map of British Honduras, with adjacent parts of
       Yucatan and Guatemala, indicating the positions of mounds
       excavated                                                    59

    8. Figurines of warriors from Mound No. 1                       60

    9. Figurines from Mound No. 1                                   60

   10. _a._ Section through earthwork inclosing circular space,
       Santa Rita. _b._ Section of wall through Santa Rita          70

   11. Egg-shaped vase from Mound No. 5                             70

   12. Metates and brazos from Mound No. 6                          75

   13. _a._ Small pottery seal. _b._ Bowl in which skull was
       found, _c._ Skull                                            75

   14. Skull and bones from Mound No. 8                             80

   15. Stone objects from Mound No. 10                              88

   16. _a._ Model of jadeite bivalve shell, _b._ Light-green
       jadeite mask, _c._ Ax head, or celt. _d._ Terra-cotta
       cylinder                                                     91

   17. Painted basin and cover from Mound No. 16                   105

   18. Pottery from Mound No. 16                                   107

   19. _a._ Decoration on vase shown in figure 60.
       _b._ Decoration of vessel from Mound No. 17                 110

   20. Incense burner from Mound No. 24                            119

   21. _a._ Small vase decorated with human head.
       _b._ Human bones from Mound No. 29                          125

   22. Painted clay figurine from Mound No. 33                     131

   23. Pottery vase from Yalloch, Guatemala                        142

   24. Pottery vase from Yalloch, Guatemala                        142

   25. Pottery vase from Yalloch, Guatemala                        142

   26. Pottery cylinder from Yalloch, Guatemala                    142

   27. Pottery cylinder from Yalloch, Guatemala                    142

   28. Pottery cylinder from Yalloch, Guatemala                    142


                        TEXT FIGURES

    1. Map showing Yucatan, Campeche, British Honduras, and part
       of Guatemala.                                                14

    2. Gold earrings made and worn by the Santa Cruz Indians        19

    3. Cross of tancasche bark worn by children                     19

    4. Powder horn and measure of bamboo used by the Indians        23

    5. Watertight box for caps, matches, or tinder, with corncob
       stopper                                                      23

    6. Whistle for attracting deer by imitating their call          24

    7. Indian carrying load of bejuco, a liana used as rope in
       house building                                               26

    8. Domestic altar                                               27

    9. Stonelike substance used to prevent fingers from sticking
       while spinning                                               29

   10. Calabash with liana base used in spinning                    30

   11. Chichanha Indian priest in front of altar at Cha chac
       ceremony                                                     43

   12. Priest tracing cross on cake and filling it in with sikil    44

   13. Sacrificing a turkey at the Cha chac ceremony                45

   14. Plan of Santa Rita mounds                                    59

   15. Figurine from Mound No. 1                                    60

   16. Figurines from Mound No. 1                                   61

   17. Unpainted object from Mound No. 1                            62

   18. Clay alligator found in Mound No. 2                          64

   19. Objects from Mound No. 4                                     68

   20. Pottery vessels from Mound No. 4                             69

   21. Objects found in Mound No. 5                                 71

   22. Diagram of Mound No. 6                                       74

   23. Diagram of trenches in Mound No. 6                           76

   24. Bowls, vases, and dishes found in Mound No. 6                77

   25. _a._ Skull. _b._ Limestone foundation. _c._ Excavation.
       _d._ Grooved flag in situ. _e._ Projecting lip               78

   26. Circular openings leading into natural cavity                80

   27. Ground plan of chultun                                       82

   28. Ground plan of Mound No. 9                                   84

   29. Wall construction of Mound No. 9                             84

   30. Details of Mound No. 9                                       85

   31. Obsidian object and pottery vase from Mound No. 10           87

   32. Obsidian arrowhead from Mound No. 10                         89

   33. Flint object from Mound No. 10                               89

   34. Obsidian object from Mound No. 10                            90

   35. Inscription on mask, plate 16, _b._                          91

   36. Inscription on ax head, plate 16, _c._                       92

   37. Flint spearheads                                             94

   38. Flint objects                                                94

   39. Devices scratched on stucco in aboriginal building           95

   40. Eccentrically shaped implements found at summit of mound     96

   41. Flint object found at base of stela                          96

   42. Flint object found at base of stela                          96

   43. Flints found in ruins at Naranjo                             97

   44. Objects from Benque Viejo                                    98

   45. Obsidian objects found in a mound near Benque Viejo          99

   46. Flint object from Seven Hills                               100

   47. Horseshoe-shaped flint object found near San Antonio        100

   48. Figure from River Thames, near London                       101

   49. Flint objects from Tennessee                                102

   50. Flint objects from Italy                                    103

   51. Small cup-shaped vase from Mound No. 15                     104

   52. Objects from Mound No. 15                                   104

   53. Conventionalized representation of bird on vessel shown
       in plate 17                                                 106

   54. Decoration on vessel shown in plate 17                      106

   55. Perforated beads found in Mound No. 16                      107

   56. Jadeite beads found in Mound No. 16                         107

   57. _a._ Circular shell disks from Mound No. 16.
       _b._ Greenstone ear plugs from Mound No. 17                 108

   58. Obsidian disk inserted in tooth of skeleton found in
       Mound No. 17                                                109

   59. Bird carrying a fish outlined on shallow plaque found in
       Mound No. 17                                                110

   60. Cylindrical pottery vase found in Mound No. 17              110

   61. Larger pottery vase found in Mound No. 17                   111

   62. Coiled plumed serpent painted on plaque found in Mound
       No. 17                                                      111

   63. Pottery vase found in Mound No. 18                          112

   64. Glyph outlined on outer surface of rim of vase shown
       in figure 63                                                112

   65. Torso, head, and headdress from Mound No. 20                113

   66. Fragment of pillar found in Mound No. 20                    113

   67. Another view of incense burner shown in plate 20            119

   68. Incense burner decorated with crude clay figurine from
       Mound No. 25                                                120

   69. Crude clay figurine found in Mound No. 25                   121

   70. Crude clay figurine found in Mound No. 25                   122

   71. Small pottery vases found in Mound No. 26                   123

   72. Red pottery vase found in Mound No. 27                      124

   73. Pottery vessels found in Mound No. 31                       128

   74. Chocolate pot found in Mound No. 31                         128

   75. Pottery vessels found in Mound No. 32                       129

   76. Head cut from limestone found in Mound No. 32               130

   77. Greenstone mask found in Mound No. 32                       130

   78. Soapstone lamp found in Mound No. 33                        131

   79. Rough pottery vessel found in Mound No. 33                  132

   80. Objects found in Mound No. 34                               132

   81. Figure in diving position on small vase                     133

   82. Design incised on femur of deer found in Mound No. 39       135

   83. Copper object found in Mound No. 39                         136

   84. Ruins found in Mound No. 40                                 137




KEY TO PRONUNCIATION OF MAYA WORDS


Vowels and consonants are pronounced as in Spanish, with the following
exceptions:

    ǩ         _k_ explosive
    K         ordinary palatal _k_
    X         _sh_ as in shut
    TŠ        _ch_ explosive
    Ɔ         _ts_
    Ai        like _i_ in confide
    tt        _t_ explosive




THE MAYA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN YUCATAN AND NORTHERN BRITISH HONDURAS

By THOMAS W. F. GANN




PART 1. CUSTOMS, CEREMONIES, AND MODE OF LIFE




INTRODUCTION


The southern and eastern parts of Yucatan, from Tuluum in the north to
the Rio Hondo in the south, are occupied to-day by two tribes of Maya
Indians, the Santa Cruz and Icaichè or Chichanha. The number of Santa
Cruz was estimated by Sapper in 1895 at about 8,000 to 10,000, but at
the present day has probably been reduced to about 5,000. The Icaichè,
the number of whom he estimated at 500, and is given by the _Guia de
Yucatan_ in 1900 as 803, now comprise not more than 200. This decrease
is due to the policy of extermination carried out among the Santa Cruz
for years by the Mexican Government, and the consequent emigration of
many of the Indians to British Honduras, Guatemala, and northern
Yucatan. The northern and western parts of British Honduras contain
between 5,000 and 6,000 Indians; those in the north are partly
indigenous and partly immigrants drawn from Yucatecan tribes who have
left their homes after various political disturbances, especially after
the occupancy of their towns of Bacalar and Santa Cruz by the Mexican
Government. The Indians of the western part of the colony are also
partly indigenous, but for the greater part Itzas, who have come in from
Peten in Guatemala.

The objects shown in figures 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 31, 35, 36, 47, 51, 52,
55, 56, 57, 59, 62, 63, 64, 65, 69, 70, 76, and 77, and in plates 8, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18a, and 19 are in the Liverpool Museum; those
shown in figures 15, 40, and 41 and in plate 9 are in the British
Museum; those shown in figure 45 and in plates 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, and
28 are in the Bristol Museum; and those shown in figures 67 and 68 and
in plates 20, 21, and 22 are in the Museum of the American Indian, Heye
Foundation.




HABITAT


The northern-part of British Honduras, between the Rio Hondo and the Rio
Nuevo, consists of an almost level plain, having an area of nearly 1,000
square miles. The soil is a vegetal humus; varying from a few inches to
several feet in depth, the average depth being about 2 feet; beneath
this is a stratum of marly limestone, outcrops of which are found in
many places. The southern part of Yucatan, which, unlike the northern
part, is comparatively well watered, is also flat, though a few small
hills are found along the northern bank of the Rio Hondo, commencing
about 50 miles from its mouth (fig. 1). Most of the land along the
rivers is swampy, producing only reeds, coarse grasses, and mangrove
trees. Beyond the swamp country are found "cuhun ridges," consisting of
river valleys or depressions in the surface which have become filled
with alluvium brought down by the rivers from the interior, forming an
exceedingly rich soil suitable for the cultivation of maize and nearly
every tropical product. It is upon these "cuhun ridges" that most of the
mounds and other relics of the ancient inhabitants are found and that
nearly all the villages of the modern Indians are built. Large tracts of
what is known as "pine ridge" are scattered throughout this area; these
are level or slightly undulating plains covered with gravel and coarse
sand--exceedingly poor soil, producing only wiry grass, yellow pines,
and small pimento palms. On these "pine ridges" Indian mounds are hardly
ever found, nor do the Indians of to-day build villages upon them except
in rare instances and for special local reasons. With the exception of
the extreme northern part, nearly the whole of this area is well watered
by rivers and streams, while scattered throughout it are numerous
lagoons and lakes, the largest of which is the Bacalar Lagoon.

  [Illustration: FIG. 1.--Map showing Yucatan, Campeche, British
                          Honduras, and part of Guatemala. The area
                          dealt with is shaded.]




PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS


The manners, customs, religious conceptions, and daily life of all these
Indians are very similar, though among the Indians of British Honduras,
who come more closely in contact with outside influences, old customs
are dying out, and old ideas and methods are being superseded by new.
The language of the tribes here considered, with slight local
dialectical variations, is the same; all are of the same physical type;
in fact, there can be little doubt that they are the direct descendants
of those Maya who occupied the peninsula of Yucatan at the time of the
conquest. Physically, though short they are robust and well
proportioned. The men average 5 feet 2 inches to 5 feet 3 inches in
height, the women about 2 inches less. The skin varies in color from
almost white to dark bronze. The hair of both sexes is long, straight,
coarse, black, and luxuriant on the head, where it extends very low over
the forehead, but is almost entirely absent from other parts of the
body. The women usually wear their hair hanging down the back in two
plaits. Their faces are round and full, with rather high cheek bones;
the skull is highly brachicephalic in type. The following indices were
taken from a small number of Santa Cruz Indians, mostly males of middle
age:

    Maximum length of head            cm. 17.52
    Maximum breadth of head           cm. 15.44
    Cephalic index                       _88.11_

    Facial height                     cm. 11.68
    Maximum bi-zygomatic breadth      cm. 12.84
    Facial index                         _84.40_

    Nasal height                      cm.  5.13
    Nasal breadth                     cm.  3.55
    Nasal index                          _69.80_

The eyes are large and dark brown, the ears small and closely applied to
the head, the nose rather broad, and the jaw prognathous. The mouth is
fairly large and the teeth excellent, though toward middle age they
become greatly worn down in many individuals from eating corn cake
impregnated with grit from the stone metate, and from the same cause
they are frequently much incrusted with tartar. The figure in both sexes
is short and broad. The long bones and the extremities are small and
delicate. Both men and women are, however, capable of considerable and
prolonged exertion. The former can carry loads of 150 pounds for 20
miles in the macapal (_tab_), a netted bag which is slung over the back
and held up by a band passing round the forehead, while the latter can
work for hours at a time grinding corn on the metate without apparent
fatigue. Many of the younger women would be considered very good
looking, measured by the most exacting standard, though they reach
maturity at an early age, and deteriorate in appearance very rapidly
after marriage, the face becoming wrinkled and the figure squat and
shapeless. In walking the men bend the body forward from the hips, keep
the eyes fixed upon the ground, and turn the toes in, habits acquired
from carrying the macapal on all occasions. So accustomed have they
become to this contrivance that many of them, when starting on a journey
of even a couple of miles, rather than go unloaded, prefer to weight the
macapal with a few stones as a counterpoise to the habitual forward
inclination of their bodies above the hips. Children begin carrying
small macapals at a very early age, and it is probably to this habit and
not, as Landa suggests, to the custom among the women of carrying their
children astride the hip that the prevalence of bowlegs (_kūlba ōk_)
among the Indians is due. These people have a peculiar and indescribable
odor, rather pleasant than otherwise; it is not affected by washing or
exercise, is much stronger in some individuals than in others, and is
perceptible in both sexes and at all ages. The women are, on the whole,
both physically and mentally superior to the men, and when dressed in
gala costume for a "baile" with spotlessly clean, beautifully
embroidered garments, all the gold ornaments they possess or can borrow,
and often a coronet of fire beetles, looking like small electric lamps
in their hair, they present a very attractive picture. They are polite
and hospitable, though rather shy with strangers; indeed in the remoter
villages they often rush into the bush and hide themselves at the
approach of anyone not known to them, especially if the men are away
working in the milpas. They are very fond of gossip and readily
appreciate a joke, especially one of a practical nature, though till one
gets to know them fairly well they appear dull and phlegmatic. When
quarreling among themselves both women and girls use the most disgusting
and obscene language, improvising as they go along, with remarkable
quick-wittedness, not binding themselves down to any conventional oaths
or forms of invective, but pouring out a stream of vituperation and
obscenity to meet each case, which strikes with unerring fidelity the
weak points in the habits, morals, ancestry, and personal appearance of
their opponents. The young girls are as bad as, if not worse than, the
older women, for whom they seem to have no respect. They are extremely
clean in their persons, and wash frequently, though with regard to their
homes they are not nearly so particular as hens, dogs, pigs, and
children roll about together promiscuously on the floor, and fleas,
lice, and jiggers abound only too frequently. The description given by
Landa (chap. XXXII, p. 192) of the Indian women at the time of the
conquest applies equally well to their descendants of the present day:

     Emborachavanse también ellas con los combites, aunque por si, como
     comian por si, y no se emborachavan tanto como los hombres.... Son
     avisadas y corteses y conversables, con que se entienden, y a
     maravilla bien partidas. Tienen poco secreto y no son tan limpias
     en sus personas ni en sus cosas con quanto se lavan como los
     ermiños.

The women are very industrious, rising usually at 3 or 4 o'clock in the
morning to prepare the day's supply of tortillas or corn cake. During
the day they prepare tobacco (_kutz_) and make cigarettes; gather cotton
(_taman_), which they spin (_kuch_), weave (_sakal_), and embroider for
garments; weave mats of palm leaf and baskets (_xush_) of a variety of
liana (_ak_); make pottery (_ul_), and cotton and henequen cord, of
which they construct hammocks (_ǩan_). In addition to these tasks they
do the family cooking and washing, look after the children, and help
their husbands to attend to the animals. Till late at night the women
may be seen spinning, embroidering, and hammock-making by the light of a
native candle or a small earthenware cuhoon-nut oil lamp, meanwhile
laughing and chatting gayly over the latest village scandal, the older
ones smoking cigarettes, while the men squat about on their low wooden
stools outside the house gravely discussing the weather, the milpas, the
hunting, or the iniquities of the Alcalde. Among the Indian women of
British Honduras the old customs are rapidly dying out; spinning and
weaving are no longer practiced, pottery making has been rendered
unnecessary by the introduction of cheap iron cooking pots and
earthenware, candles have given place to mineral oil lamps, and even the
metate is being rapidly superseded by small American hand mills for
grinding the corn. The men's time is divided between agriculture,
hunting, fishing, and boat and house building, though at times they
undertake tasks usually left to the women, as mat and basket making, and
even spinning and weaving. The Indians of British Honduras who live near
settlements do light work for the rancheros and woodcutters; they have
the reputation of being improvident and lazy, and of leaving their work
as soon as they have acquired sufficient money for their immediate
needs, and this is to some extent true, as the Indian always wants to
invest his cash in something which will give an immediate return in
pleasure or amusement. The men are silent, though not sullen, very
intelligent in all matters which concern their own daily life, but
singularly incurious as to anything going on outside of this. They are
civil, obliging, and good-tempered, and make excellent servants, when
they can be got to work, but appear to be for the most part utterly
lacking in ambition or in any desire to accumulate wealth with which to
acquire comforts and luxuries not enjoyed by their neighbors. It happens
occasionally that an individual does perforce acquire wealth, as in the
case of the head chief of the Icaichè Indians, who was paid a salary by
the Mexican Government to keep his people quiet, and royalties on chicle
cut on his lands by various contractors. He accumulated a considerable
sum, all in gold coin, which he stored in a large demijohn and hid in
the bush. At his death, as no one knew the place where the demijohn was
buried, the money was permanently lost. They are remarkably skillful at
finding their way in the bush by the shortest route from point to point,
possessing a faculty in this respect which amounts almost to an
instinct; they are skillful also at following the tracks of men and
animals in the bush by means of very slight indications, as broken twigs
and disturbed leaves, imperceptible to an ordinary individual. The men
are very stoical in bearing pain. I have removed both arms at the
shoulder joints, with no other surgical instrument than a long butcher's
knife, and no anesthetic except several drinks of rum, for an Indian,
crushed between the rollers of a native sugar mill, without his uttering
a single complaint. The Indians are undoubtedly cruel, but not wantonly
so, as the shocking acts of cruelty reported as being perpetrated by
them from time to time are usually by way of reprisal for similar or
worse acts on the part of the Mexicans. Before the rising of the Indians
in 1848, they were throughout this part of Yucatan practically in a
state of slavery, and were often treated by their Spanish masters with
the utmost barbarity. As an instance of this it is recorded of a
well-known merchant of Bacalar that he was in the habit of burying his
Indian servants in the ground to the neck, with their heads shaved,
exposed to the hot sun; their heads were then smeared with molasses and
the victims were left to the ants; and this punishment was inflicted for
no very serious offense. It is hardly to be wondered at that such
treatment left in the Indians' hearts an undying hatred for their
masters which, when in their turn they gained the ascendancy, found vent
in acts of the most horrible cruelty--flogging, burning, mutilation, and
even crucifixion.


DRESS

The men wear hats of platted palm leaf, which they make themselves;
those woven from coarse split palm leaf are known as _xani pok_, those
of very fine leaf, like Panama hats, bear the name _bomi pok_ (pl. 1).
They wear cotton trousers (_eex_), or in some sections short cotton
drawers (_xkulex_), with a short, loose, shirt-like jacket of cotton
hanging outside the trousers. On the feet they use sandals of danta hide
(_xanapkeuel_) held in place by a leather or henequen thong passing
between the great and second toes and around the back of the heel to the
front of the instep, where it is fastened. Formerly the cotton was
grown, spun, and woven at home, but nowadays it is giving place to cheap
imported English and American goods, while the sandals are being
superseded by moccasins and even by imported shoes. The moccasins the
Indians make themselves, tanning the hides (usually of deer or antelope)
in lime and red mangrove bark and stitching the parts together with thin
strips of leather. These moccasins, which are made on crude wooden
lasts, are very comfortable and wear well.

  [Illustration: PLATE 1
                 GROUP OF SANTA CRUZ INDIANS]

  [Illustration: FIG. 2.--Gold earrings made and worn by the Santa Cruz
                          Indians.]

The women wear two garments of cotton; the huipil (_yuptè_), a loose
short-sleeved blouse, cut square at the neck, and reaching nearly to the
knees, and a short skirt reaching to between the knee and the ankle,
known as a _pik_. The neck, the lower border, and the armholes of the
blouse and the edge of the skirt were formerly beautifully embroidered
in varicolored floral and geometrical devices; now, however, cotton
manufactured in England or the United States and stamped in colors to
imitate the original embroidery is rapidly coming into use. The women
formerly went barefooted or wore loose slippers; now they frequently
wear imported shoes, often with high heels, a feature which renders
their walk and carriage awkward and stilted. They often go bareheaded,
but sometimes wear a sort of shawl (_bostch_) around the head and
shoulders. Many of them wear large round or oval plaques of gold (_tup_)
in the ears, survivals, probably, of the enormous round ear disks worn
by the ancient Maya (fig. 2). Some of the women wear long gold chains,
with religious medallions attached, while the smaller children wear a
variety of curious objects, as small coins, shells, beads, dried seeds,
and berries, with figurines in wood, stone, pottery, and metal, strung
round their necks. Many of these are worn as charms or amulets to
protect the wearer against diseases, accidents, or evil spirits, or to
bring good luck. A charm worn by nearly all children consists of a small
cross of _tancasche_ bark (fig. 3) which is regarded as a sovereign
remedy for flatulence, a complaint from which, owing to the nature of
their diet, nearly all suffer.

  [Illustration: FIG. 3.--Cross of tancasche bark worn by children.]


INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES


AGRICULTURE

Of all the arts practiced by the Indian, agriculture is by far the most
important; indeed the greater part of his time and labor are devoted to
the milpa (_kol_), or corn plantation, which affords him his principal
means of livelihood, for if the corn crop fails he knows that actual
starvation will menace his family until the next crop is gathered. The
virgin bush, in which the milpa is made, is cut down about December or
January, only the large and hardwood trees being left standing. This is
the most arduous part of the work, and the neighbors often assist in it,
being helped in turn when making their own milpas. The bush is allowed
to dry until the end of May (the dry season lasting from January to
May), when it is burned off. After the burnt area has been cooled by the
first shower of rain it is planted in corn (_ixim_). This is a simple
operation, two or three men going over the ground, each with a bag of
corn and a sharp-pointed stick, making small holes at fairly regular
intervals, into each of which they drop a few grains of corn, and then
cover them with earth. About October the corn begins to ripen, whereupon
each stalk is bent about a foot below the ear and allowed to hang down
for several days in order that rain may not gain entrance and spoil the
grain in the final stages of ripening. During this period the owner
spends nearly all his time in the milpa, sleeping there in a little
palm-leaf shack at night, since many animals, as deer and wild hogs, are
very fond of corn, which is subject to raids also by neighboring Indians
and by tame pigs from the village. When the corn is ripe, it is stored,
still in the husk, upon a low platform, in a small house specially built
for the purpose, often, in order to avoid transportation, situated
within the milpa. It is shelled as required for use, the surplus from
that eaten by the family and stock being exchanged at the nearest
village for cash or for cotton cloth, rum, iron cooking pots,
ammunition, and other luxuries. The shelling is done by rubbing the
husked ear against a rough flat surface, made by binding a number of
corncobs (_bacal_) together into a circle with liana. Many fruits and
vegetables besides corn are grown in the milpa, including yams (_xaci
macal_), camote (_īs_), pumpkins (_kuum_), squashes (_xka_), tomatoes
(_paak_), plantains (_haz_), colalu (_xterkoch_), aguacate (_on_), plums
(_abal_), oranges (_pakaal_), siricote (_kopte_), sapodillas (_ya_),
mamai (_chacal haz_), okra, garden egg, melon, breadfruit, sweet lime,
pineapple, and a variety of others.


PROCURING FOOD; COOKING

Both men and women take for the first meal of the day a hot thick drink
known as _posol_, made from ground corn and water, often flavored with
honey; later they eat tortillas, beans, and chili pepper, accompanied
with a cold drink made from corn. In the evening they make their
principal repast, which includes game, pork, fish, or eggs, with beans
and other vegetables, plenty of chili pepper, and either chocolate or
some hot drink made from corn. They use a great variety of drinks
concocted of ground maize and water, including _chocosacan_, a solution
of the masa from which tortillas are made, in water, flavored with a
little salt; _pinol_, a solution of ground toasted corn seasoned with
pimento and other spices; _posol_, boiled corn ground to a paste and
mixed with hot water; _sachà_, very much like posol, but the corn is not
cooked soft, so that the beverage is gritty; and, lastly, _atol_, which
is chocosacan boiled till the mixture becomes thick and glutinous.

Tortillas, or corn cake, sometimes eaten hot, sometimes cold, and at
times toasted, are the Indian's chief mainstay in the way of food, as
they appear at every meal, and at a pinch he can exist on them alone for
a very long period. Tortillas are made in the following way: The grain
is first soaked overnight in a lye of wood ashes, treatment which
softens the grain and loosens the outer husk. The softened grain is next
ground into a fine paste on an oblong stone, slightly concave, known as
a metate (_ka_), by means of a stone rolling pin thicker in the middle
than at the ends, designated as a brazo (_u kabka_). This procedure
takes considerable time, as the grain has to be ground a number of times
in order to get the paste to the required degree of fineness. When the
paste or masa is ready it is flattened by hand into small round cakes
(tortillas), which are baked on an iron or earthen plaque (_xamach_)
over a glowing wood fire.

The hunters are experts at barbecuing (_macan_) the carcasses of various
birds and animals, chiefly deer, peccary, wild turkey, and curassow, as
they often get a large supply of game when several days' journey from
the village, which, unless preserved in some way, would quickly spoil.
The carcasses are cut into joints; the birds plucked, cleaned, and split
open; and the meat thus prepared is hung in a small palm-leaf shack
rendered as nearly airtight as possible, upon the floor of which is
kindled a fire of damp cedar chips. These give off some heat and great
quantities of aromatic smoke, so that in about 24 hours the meat is
sufficiently cured to last for several weeks. Meat prepared in this way
is considered a great delicacy. If it is wished to preserve the meat for
longer periods the process is prolonged and salt may be rubbed in.
Strips of meat and carcasses of birds may sometimes be seen hanging
from the rafters over the fire in the kitchen so desiccated, hard, and
blackened that it would appear impossible to eat them; but after months
of drying this meat, when soaked in warm water for 24 hours, is not
unpalatable. The Indians wash their hands before and after eating, a
very necessary practice, as they eat exclusively with their fingers,
using the tortillas to scoop up gravy, beans, and other mushy
foodstuffs. They eat at small round tables about 16 inches high,
sitting, or rather squatting, around them on little blocks of wood 4 to
5 inches high. They are very fond of salt, which among the coast Indians
is obtained by evaporating sea water, among the inland villages by trade
from Yucatan and Guatemala. Since this supply has been almost cut off,
owing to the troubles with Mexico, the Indians frequently use for salt
the ashes obtained by burning botan tops. Men and women do not eat
together, as the women are preparing relays of hot tortillas for the men
while the meal lasts. Their food and mode of eating is well described by
Landa (chap. XXI, p. 120):

     Que por la mañana toman la bebida caliente con pimienta, como esta
     dicho y entre dia las otras frias, y a la noche los guisados. Y que
     si no ay carne hazen sus salsas de la pimienta y legumbres. Que no
     acostumbravan comer los hombres con las mugeres, y que ellos comian
     por si en el suelo, o quando mucho sobre una serilla por mesa: y
     que comen bien quando lo tienen, y quando no, sufren muy bien la
     hambre y passan con muy poco. Y que se lavan las manos y la boca
     despues de comer.

Indeed, the foregoing description would apply almost as well to Indians
of the more remote villages of the present day as to those of the time
immediately after the conquest. In localities where they have come in
contact with more civilized communities their menu has been considerably
enlarged by the introduction of imported foodstuffs, while their methods
of eating have been changed by the introduction of knives, forks, and
spoons. The native methods of cooking are very primitive. Three large
flat stones so placed as to form an equilateral triangle, known as
_koben_, form the only fireplace; in this is kindled the fire of sticks
or split logs, over which is placed the earthenware or iron cooking pots
or plaque for baking tortillas, resting on the stones. Fire (_kaak_) is
usually obtained through the use of matches among the Indians of British
Honduras. Hunters and others who spend a great part of their time in the
bush employ flint and steel. Among the Indians in the remote villages
fire is still made by swiftly rotating a sharp-pointed shaft of some
hardwood (usually dogwood) in a hole made in a small slab of very light
dry wood (commonly gumbo limbo). There is no chimney to the kitchen, the
smoke finding its way out as best it can through the doors and crevices
in the walls; consequently the whole of the interior, with its
permanent furnishings, is colored a fine rich brown.


HUNTING

  [Illustration: FIG. 4.--Powder horn and measure of bamboo used by the
                          Indians.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 5.--Watertight box for caps, matches, or tinder,
                          with corncob stopper.]

It must be admitted that the Indian is no sportsman in the pursuit of
game, the claims of the pot being always paramount. He rarely shoots at
a flying bird unless to fire into the midst of a flock of parrots or
wild ducks, and when after the larger game he waits till he can deliver
the contents of his gun point-blank into some vital part. This practice
may be due partly to the limitations of his weapon, which till recent
years consisted of a muzzle-loading section of gas pipe, nearly as
dangerous when discharged to the hunter as to the game, and partly to
the fact that the bush is usually so dense that an animal, if not shot
at point-blank range, can not be gotten at all. It is probably not more
than four generations since the use of the bow and arrow died out among
the Indians in the western part of British Honduras, as old men among
them have told me that they could remember seeing a few still in use
when they were very young. The flint arrowheads, they said, were
obtained down the Mopan River. This seems quite possible, as at Baker's,
not far from Belize, there is an outcrop of flint, where, judging by the
great heaps of fresh-looking chips and rejects still in existence, a
considerable "factory" must have existed at a comparatively recent date.
Some of these old men could still make fairly serviceable bows and
arrows, the heads of the latter being cut from hardwood.

The principal game animals of this region are the deer (_ke_), two
species of wild hog, the warri and peccary (_kekem_), gibnut (_halib_),
armadillo (_vetsh_), wild turkey (_kutz_), parrot (_tut_), pigeons of
various kinds (_mucui_), curassow (_kambul_), quam (_cosh_), quail
(_num_), and partridge (_mankolom_). Besides these, birds in great
variety, reptiles, and mammals are killed and eaten from time to time,
including plovers, garzas, toucans, water hens, wild ducks, and
chichalacas. The iguana (_tolok_) is eaten by the Indians in the west of
British Honduras, as are also the woula (_ochkan_), a large constrictor
snake, and the rattlesnake, known as the _cazon i kash_, or "little
shark of the woods." Turtles (_sacak_) are often captured along the east
coast of Yucatan and the adjacent islands, and their eggs in the
breeding season form a great delicacy for the Santa Cruz Indians living
in the neighborhood of Tuluum. Hicatee (_ak_) and bucatora are caught in
great numbers in all the rivers and lagoons. The tiger (_balam_), puma
(_coh_), picote (_chic_), monkey (_maash_), tapir (_tzimin_), squirrel
(_kuuk_), cane rat (_tšo_), and other animals are hunted from time to
time, either for their skins or flesh. Deer are secured in considerable
numbers in the rutting season by imitating their call with a wooden
whistle (fig. 6); they are also found in the milpas, just after the
burning, where they come to lick the slightly saline ashes. At this time
the owners build platforms on poles 10 to 12 feet high, on top of which
they spend the whole night in an extremely cramped and uncomfortable
position, waiting for deer or other game to approach near enough for an
easy shot. A favorite method of hunting the larger game animals is to go
out at night with a split-pine torch attached to the hat; this attracts
animals of all kinds, whose eyes may be seen gleaming in the dark,
affording an easy mark, though not infrequently a neighbor's errant pig
pays the penalty of curiosity.

  [Illustration: FIG. 6.--Whistle for attracting deer by imitating their
                          call.]

Traps of two kinds are in common use. One employed to snare larger game
is constructed in the following way: A path frequented by game in going
to and from a watering place is found; along this is dug a shallow
trench opposite a good springy young sapling; two stakes are driven in,
one on each side of the trench, the one farthest from the tree being
crooked at the top. A piece of henequen cord, provided with a noose at
one end, and with a stick long enough to extend from one stake to the
other, firmly tied by its middle above the noose, is attached to the top
of the sapling by its other end. The sapling is then bent down and held
in place by the stick above the noose, which is fixed lightly between
the crook in one stake and the stake opposite to it, the loop hanging
suspended between the two. Lastly, a number of sticks and leaves are
scattered lightly over the trench and beside the stakes and loop.
Animals coming along the run are very apt to put their necks in the
loop, and by pulling on this, to release the cross stick, whereupon they
are immediately suspended in the air by the jerking back of the bent
sapling. Animals of all sizes, from rabbits to tigers, are caught in
traps of this kind, the strength and adaptability of which vary with the
size of the bent tree and the adjustment of the noose. Another trap,
used only for small animals, consists of an oblong cage made of split
bamboo or cabbage bark. Over the opening, which is in the top, rests an
accurately balanced strip of board, baited at one end with corn. When
the animal endeavors to reach the bait it is precipitated into the trap,
and the board swings back into place, covering the exit. Before they
obtain guns the boys use slings, with which they can throw pebbles with
remarkable force and accuracy, bringing down birds, squirrels, and other
small game. They keep many tame animals, some for food, others as pets,
including pigs, dogs, cats, peccaries, gibnuts, rabbits, quashes, nicos
de noche, and squirrels; also birds, as parrots, doves, quam, curassow,
chichalaca, sinsonte, pavo real, and many others.


FISHING

Many fish are found in the coastal waters, in the rivers, and in the
lagoons of the interior, including cazones, tarpon, skipjacks, snappers,
eels, baracoudas, stone bass, cobarli, jewfish, tubers, bay snooks,
river snooks, and a variety of others. They are caught with hook and
line, in cast and seine nets, in traps, and by spearing or harpooning.
Fish traps are cylindrical in shape, with a funnel-shaped opening at
each end, the apex of the funnel pointing toward the center of the trap,
so that entrance is easy but exit very difficult. The traps, made of
split bamboo, are placed upon the bottoms of rivers or lagoons, baited
with "masa," which attracts multitudes of the tiny fish there abounding;
these in their turn attract larger fish, which enter the trap in pursuit
of the small fry and are captured. Harpooning at night by the light of a
split-pine torch is about the nearest approach to real sport which the
Indian enjoys; this is usually done near the bar of a river, on a calm
dark night, by three men in a canoe, one paddling, one holding the
torch, and the third wielding the harpoon. This implement consists of a
slender cane 10 to 12 feet in length provided with a sharp barbed
spindle-shaped steel head, fitting into the hollow at one end, so that
on striking the fish the head parts from the shaft to which it is
attached by a cord held in the hand of the harpooner. The fish are
attracted by the light of the torch, and the harpooner strikes at the
swirl which they make alongside the dory. Harpooning is rather an
exciting form of sport, as it is impossible to tell what sort of fish
has been struck until it is landed. Hicatee and bucatora are harpooned
with an unbarbed triangular point, this giving the best hold on their
tough shells; they are captured also by spreading small nets in the
vicinity of the stumps and holes along the river banks, which they
frequent.


CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSES AND FURNITURE

The Indians construct their houses in the following manner: First a
number of straight trees about 8 inches in diameter at the base and
crotched at the top are selected in the bush for posts. These are
usually Santa Maria, chichem, sapodilla, or some hardwood. They are cut
down, and after having been peeled are dragged to the site of the new
house, where they are firmly planted, one at each of the four corners
and others, the number depending on the size of the house, at short
intervals between in the lines of the walls. In the crotches other
slightly smaller poles 5 to 6 inches in diameter, also peeled, are laid;
to these are attached still smaller poles, which run up to the ridgepole
(_honache_), forming rafters (_uinciche_). All this framework is firmly
bound together by means of ropes of liana (fig. 7). Rows of long thin
pliable sticks are next bound round the rafters, and to these are
attached layer upon layer of "huana" (_shaan_) leaves till a thatch,
sometimes 18 inches thick and quite impervious to rain, is formed (pl.
4).

  [Illustration: FIG. 7.--Indian carrying load of bejuco, a liana used
                          as rope in house building.]

The walls between the posts are filled in with "tasistas," a small palm
trunk, or in some cases with strips of split cabbage palm. The outer
sides of the walls may be daubed with a mixture of mud and hair, or of
chopped fiber (_pakloom_), and whitewashed, or they may be thatched with
palm leaves. The floor is made of marl dust pounded down to a flat hard
surface.

  [Illustration: PLATE 2
                 MAYA GIRLS FISHING]

  [Illustration: PLATE 3
                 FISH DRYING ON ONE OF THE CAYS OFF THE COAST OF YUCATAN]

  [Illustration: PLATE 4
                 a. LEAF-THATCHED HOUSE
                 b. INDIAN HOUSE ON RIO HONDO
                 MAYO INDIAN HOUSES]

Doors and windows may be made of wickerwork of liana, of split cabbage
palm, or of a frame of sticks thatched with palm leaves. When a man
undertakes the building of a new house his neighbors usually help him,
and the residence is ready for occupancy in a few days, as all the
materials are growing ready to hand in the neighboring forest, and
require only cutting down and assembling. The facility with which their
dwellings are constructed, and the difficulty in getting more than one
or two crops in succession from each plantation, with their primitive
agricultural methods, probably account for the frequent changes in site
which one notices in Indian villages. As the lands in one neighborhood
become impoverished, the population has a tendency gradually to desert
the old village, and start a new one in a more favorable locality.

The kitchen, which is a replica of the house on a small scale, is
usually placed a few yards behind it.

  [Illustration: FIG. 8.--Domestic altar.]

The furniture is of the simplest, consisting of a small round cedar
table, with a little bowl-shaped projection which contains a lump of
masa when tortillas are being made and chili peppers or salt at
mealtimes. The seats are mere blocks of wood, 3 or 4 inches high
(_caanche_), with perhaps one or two more pretentious low hollow-backed
wooden chairs covered with deer skin or "tiger" skin. A number of
calabashes of all shapes and sizes, with a few earthen water jars, iron
cooking pots, and plaques for baking tortillas, are found in all houses.
Hammocks (_káan_) of cotton or henequen fiber are always conspicuous
articles of furniture, as they are slung all around the room, making it
very difficult to move about in it when they are let down. In many
houses contact with the hammocks is not desirable, as lice have a habit
of leaving the body of the hammock during the day and secreting
themselves in the knots between the body and the arms, whence they may
transfer themselves to the garments of the unwary. If the hammock is
large the father and mother often sleep in one, their heads at opposite
ends, while the smaller children, frequently to the number of three or
four, occupy another. There can be no such thing as privacy, as the
whole family commonly sleep, live, and eat in a single room, which at
most is divided into two apartments by a flimsy cotton curtain. A
prominent object in most Indian houses is an altar (_canche_), or high
square table, upon which stands a wooden cross (fig. 8). The altar is
covered with a cotton cloth, embroidered in flowers and religious
symbols; the cross is draped with ribbon or strips of colored fabric,
and sometimes with crude models, in silver or gold, of legs, arms, and
hands, representing thank offerings to some favorite Santo for the
healing of corresponding parts of the body. Little images in wax, and,
if the Indian can obtain them, religious oleographs and medallions, with
colored-glass vases, are commonly found upon the altar, which is
frequently dressed with fresh flowers.

The Indian's only tool is his machete, a heavy cutlass-like knife, about
16 inches long; with this he cuts and cleans his milpa, makes his house
and most of his furniture, digs postholes, and fights and defends
himself.

His indispensable belongings consist of a hammock, a few calabashes and
pots, a machete, and a cotton suit, all of which he can carry slung over
his back in a macapal; with his wife and dogs trotting behind him, he
can leave his old home and seek pastures new with a light heart and
untroubled mind, knowing that the bush will provide for all his needs.


POTTERY MAKING

Pottery making is rapidly dying out through the greater part of this
area, owing to the importation of more convenient and durable vessels.
It is undertaken almost exclusively by the older women, who employ a
fine light yellow clay mixed with sand or powdered quartz. They make
vessels in considerable variety, both as to size and shape, which are
used for the storage of water and dry material, as corn, beans, and
achiote, and as cooking pots. They do not use a potter's wheel, but mold
the smaller utensils by hand and build up the larger by the addition of
fragment upon fragment of clay. The outside is smoothed over with a
little wooden spade-like implement. No polish, glaze, or paint is
applied to the pottery, either inside or out; the highest effort at
decoration resulting in merely a few incised lines just below the neck,
or a rough scalloping around the rim. The pottery is burned in a clear,
open wood fire; when completed the ware is known as _ul_.


BOAT BUILDING

The Indians living in the neighborhood of lakes and rivers possess
dories or canoes which vary in size from tiny craft 5 to 6 feet long by
16 to 18 inches beam, capable of holding only a single individual, to
large craft 25 feet or more in length, large enough to hold a dozen
people. All their canoes are constructed by the simple process of
hollowing out large logs, the more durable ones being made from cedar,
the lighter ones from wild cotton (_yaxche_).

  [Illustration: PLATE 5
                 MAYA WOMAN, 105 YEARS OLD, SPINNING COTTON]

  [Illustration: PLATE 6
                 MAYA LOOM
                 _a._ Yamal. _b._ Xunche. _c._ Sikinche. _d._ Toboche.
                 _e._ Cheil. _f._ Mamacche. _g._ Yoch. _h._ Botoch.
                 _i._ New spindle. _k._ Old spindle. _l._ Cotton cloth.]

The boats are pointed, bow and stern, and when steel tools are available
to their makers the lines are often very graceful. Many of the boats,
however, follow to some extent the contours of the logs from which they
were made, being exceedingly clumsy and difficult to manage. On the
rivers and lakes the only method of propulsion is by means of a
broad-bladed cedar paddle about 5 feet long, or, where the water is
shallow and the bottom hard, a long pole. Both men and women have
acquired considerable dexterity in paddling and can keep it up at a
4-mile-an-hour gait from early morning till late at night, with very
short intervals for refreshment. They use their canoes for trading corn,
vegetables, lime, and live stock among villages along the river banks,
for line fishing, spearing, and netting, and for getting from place to
place. On the large lagoons and along the seacoast they sometimes use
the pole to support a lug sail.


SPINNING AND WEAVING

Spinning (_kuch_) is done by means of a spindle (_hechech_) of hardwood,
12 to 14 inches long, weighted about 3 inches from the bottom with a
hardwood or pottery ring (pl. 5). The upper end is revolved by the
finger and thumb of the right hand, which are constantly rubbed on a
piece of stonelike substance, made from deerskin burned and ground to a
powder, to prevent them from sticking (fig. 9). The cotton (_taman_) may
be held in the left hand, or on the shoulder; the lower end of the
spindle rests in a small calabash (_luch_), which is cemented into a
support of woven liana (_met_), the _luch_ and _met_ together being
known as _toh_ (fig. 10).

  [Illustration: FIG. 9.--Stonelike substance used to prevent fingers
                          from sticking while spinning.]

Weaving is done on a simple loom consisting of a cloth beam and yarn
beam (_xunche_) of light strong wood, connected by the warp (_cheil_)
(pl. 6). The cloth beam is attached round the back of the weaver by a
thick henequen cord (_yamal_), enabling him to tighten the warp at will
by simply leaning backward. The yarn beam is usually attached to a
doorpost. The shuttle (_botosh_) consists of a light stick, pointed at
both ends, on which the weft is wound obliquely. All the alternate warp
strands may be raised together by means of a heddle (_mamacche_)
consisting of a number of loops attached to a rod, each loop passing
round a warp strand, so that when the rod is raised the warp threads are
raised with it. The lease rods (_halahteh_) consist of splints of hard
heavy wood, usually sapodilla, 2 to 3 inches broad, one-third of an inch
thick in the center, with sharp edges and pointed ends. A loose rod
(_toboche_) about the size of the yarn beam is used to roll up the
completed material (_yoch_). The loom for cotton cloth is usually 2-1/2
to 3 feet broad, but much smaller looms are frequently used for narrower
strips of material.


MINOR INDUSTRIES


TOBACCO CURING

The tobacco leaves are hung in bunches, often under the roof of the corn
house, in the milpa, in a free current of air, till they are thoroughly
dry; they are then powdered in a shallow basin, or the bottom cut from a
large calabash, and mixed with the leaves of the _chiohle_, a species of
vanilla, which gives a distinctive flavor and fragrance to the tobacco;
finally the mixture is rolled into cigarettes (_chiople_) in a covering
of corn husk (_coloch_).

  [Illustration: FIG. 10.--Calabash with liana base used in spinning.]


BASKET AND MAT WEAVING

Baskets are woven from a special thin tough liana and from split cane;
those of liana (_ak_), which are large and coarse, are commonly used for
carrying corn from the milpa, slung over the shoulders like a macapal.
The split-cane baskets, which are smaller and more neatly woven, are
used in the house for all sorts of domestic purposes.

Henequen fiber is used by the Indians for a great variety of purposes.
The fiber is obtained from the leaf, which is cleaned upon a smooth
board (_pokche_) about 4 feet long by 6 inches broad, in the following
way: The top of the board is held against the lower part of the
operator's chest while the lower end rests on the floor. The leaf is
placed on the board and the pulp scraped from the fiber with a bar of
hardwood, triangular in section. At the upper end of the board is a deep
notch in its side, in which the cleaned part of the leaf is clamped,
thus fixing the part which is being scraped. The cleaning has to be
done very early in the morning, as when the sun gets hot the juice from
the pulp produces an unpleasant itching rash upon the skin. The fiber
when cleaned and dried is made into rope and cord; from the cord
hammocks, sacks, a coarse kind of cloth, and many other articles are
manufactured. Candles are made by dipping a wick of twisted cotton into
melted black beeswax (_box keb_), obtained from wild bees. Sometimes a
number of the logs in which the wild bees hive are brought in to the
village and placed one above the other, on trestles, to form a sort of
apiary, in order that honey and wax may be always obtainable.

Oil for cooking and for burning in small earthenware lamps with twisted
cotton wicks is obtained by breaking up the kernel of the cuhoon nut and
boiling it in water. A clear rather thin oil floats to the surface,
which may easily be skimmed off. Near the sea coconut oil is prepared in
the same way.




SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICS


VILLAGES


The villages vary in size from two or three houses to two hundred or
more, with inhabitants numbering from 10 or 12 to more than 1,000. In
the smaller villages the houses are very irregularly disposed; in the
larger they are arranged more or less regularly so as to form streets
around a large central space, or plaza, where the dance house and church
are usually situated. Each house is surrounded by its own patio, or
yard, generally inclosed in a fence of "tasistas," in which the bush is
allowed to grow to a considerable height in order to provide a
convenient latrine for the women and children. Dogs, pigs, and vultures
serve as scavengers. Many of the Indians, especially the Santa Cruz, are
at great pains to conceal the whereabouts of their villages. Along the
main roads only a few scattered groups of huts will be seen, while the
larger villages are approached by tracks so inconspicuous that they may
easily be missed. The villages themselves are surrounded by a maze of
narrow tortuous paths, in which a stranger may wander about for some
time before finding his way in. The Santa Cruz are said sometimes to cut
the tongues from their cocks in order to prevent them crowing and so
betraying the situation of the village.

The Indians are very jealous of outside interference in their affairs
and do not permit foreigners to reside in their villages. An exception
was made in the case of a number of Chinese coolies imported into
British Honduras many years ago, most of whom ran away to the Santa Cruz
country, where they were well received and married Indian wives. Among
their offspring, it is interesting to note, are found a very unusual
proportion of defectives. On one occasion the Mexican Government
commenced to cut a road through from Peto to Santa Cruz, the Indian
capital. Five of the Santa Cruz Indians went to see the work going on
and were well received and given useful presents. On returning to their
own country, however, they were executed by the head chief as traitors
for encouraging the entry of outsiders into their territory.


MARRIAGE AND CHILDREN

The Indian girls married formerly at about 14 or 15, the boys at about
17 or 18 years. After the conquest of Bacalar, however, and the
expulsion of Yucatecans from Indian territory a law was passed making
marriage compulsory for all girls of 12 years of age and upward. This
was probably done with the idea of increasing the population, which had
been considerably depleted by the long-continued war. Formerly, the
first question of a girl's father to her suitor was "_Hai tzak a kul hai
tzak taman?_" (How many macates of corn and cotton have you?); but at
the present day there are not enough men to "go round." The Indians of
British Honduras are usually married by the Catholic priest, though the
actual ceremony is often performed months or even years after the young
couple have set up housekeeping together, since owing to the remoteness
of many of the Indian settlements the priest can visit them only at long
intervals. Among the Santa Cruz marriages are not considered legal
unless performed by an official known as the _yumxcrib_ (probably
derived from the Maya _Yum_, "lord," and Spanish _escribano_), who holds
a position somewhat analogous to that of colonial secretary in a British
colony.

The babies and smaller children in general are pretty, merry little
things. The mothers almost invariably nurse them well into the second
year, as the mammary glands are remarkably well developed and the
secretion is abundant and long continued. Children are much desired by
both parents and are well treated and loved, though not spoiled. If the
father and mother separate, the very young children remain with the
mother; of the older children, the boys go with the father, the girls
with the mother. If small children are left destitute by the death of
both parents, the nearest relative takes them, and in the absence of
relatives they are distributed by the subchief among families of his
choosing in their own village. When a man dies his widow takes the home,
furniture, domestic animals, corn, and plantations; other possessions,
if such exist, are divided equally between the widow and the older
children, each taking such articles as will be most useful to him or
her. When a woman dies her jewelry, ornaments, and clothes are divided
between her daughters. The marriage tie is a somewhat loose one, and the
more the Indians come in contact with civilization the looser it seems
to become. In British Honduras, where the Indians are closely associated
with Spaniards, Mestizos, Negroes, and other races, the women change
their partners with the utmost facility. The Negroes are called
_kisinbosh_, "black devils," by the Indians, a term which, however it
originated, is now employed without any particularly opprobrious
significance, as many of the Maya women show no repugnance to a Negro
husband. A good deal of the immorality is brought about by the cheapness
of rum and the facility with which it is obtainable by the Indians. The
husband takes to drink, neglects his wife and family, and probably gets
entangled with some other woman: the wife, in order to obtain food,
clothing, and a shelter for herself and children, is driven to an
alliance with some other man who is a better provider. The consequence
is that in British Honduras all degrees of racial mixture are to be
found between Indian women and European, East Indian, Chinese, and Negro
men, who, again intermarrying, produce a bewildering racial
kaleidoscope.

The Indians are a short-lived race, a fact due partly to their
indigestible and badly cooked food and partly to the prevalence among
them of malarial fever (_chokuil_), with accompanying anemia (_xcan
mucui_) and splenic enlargement (_canchikin_), but chiefly to
overindulgence in alcohol whenever an opportunity offers. Notable
exceptions to this rule are, however, not uncommon, and once an
individual passes the four-score mark he or she is quite likely to live
to well over 100 years: dried up, wrinkled, and feeble, but clinging to
life with an almost incredible tenacity.


DRUNKENNESS

Landa frequently mentions the fact that in his day drunkenness
(_kaltal_) was the curse of the Indians and the cause of many crimes
among them, including murder, rape, and arson.[1] At the present time
these remarks apply equally well; indeed, drunkenness is probably more
prevalent than formerly, as the rum is made locally and is far more
intoxicating than the _balchè_, which Landa describes as a drink made
from fermented honey, water, and roots. Moreover, the people drink rum
at all times and seasons, whereas both the preparation and consumption
of _balchè_ were to some extent ceremonial, as was the resulting
intoxication. Drunkenness is not considered in any way a disgrace, but
is looked on rather as an amiable weakness. The women, especially the
older ones, drink a good deal but they usually do so in the privacy of
their own houses. I have seen, however, a little girl of 14 or 15
purchase a pint of rum in a village liquor store, and go out on the
plaza, where she drank it in a few gulps; then, lying down in the fierce
heat of the afternoon sun, she lapsed into alcoholic coma. Alcohol
effects an extraordinarily rapid change for the worse in the Indian's
temperament; from a quiet, polite, rather deferential individual, he is
converted almost in a moment into a maudlin idiot, staggering about
singing foolish snatches of native songs, and endeavoring to embrace
everyone he comes in contact with. When thwarted while in this condition
his temper is likely to flare up at the slightest provocation, whereupon
the thin veneer of civilization and restraint is sloughed in a moment,
and he becomes savage, impudent, overbearing, and contemptuous toward
the stranger, and ready to draw his machete and fight to kill, with
friend or foe alike.


CHIEFS

On the death of the head chief (_noh calan_ or _nohoch yumtat_) among
the Santa Cruz and Icaichè the oldest of the subchiefs (_chan
yumtopilob_) is supposed to succeed him; as a matter of fact there are
always rival claimants for the chieftainship, and the subchief with the
strongest personality or greatest popularity among the soldiers usually
succeeds in grasping the office. There are nearly always rival factions
endeavoring to oust the chief in power, and the latter rarely dies a
natural death. The village subchiefs are elected by the people. The
power of the head chief is practically absolute over the whole tribe.
Some years ago, when Roman Pec was head chief, one of the subchiefs came
to Corozal, the nearest town in British Honduras, to purchase powder,
shot, and other supplies. He remained some time, as he had many friends
in the place, and obtained, among other things, a bottle of laudanum to
relieve toothache. On returning to his village he was met by three
soldiers, who informed him that he was to go with them at once to the
head chief, as the latter was angry with him on account of his long
absence from the country. Aware that this was equivalent to a sentence
of death, he asked permission to retire to his house for a few minutes,
to get ready for the journey, and taking advantage of the opportunity,
he swallowed the whole contents of the bottle of laudanum. This began to
take effect very shortly, and long before reaching the capital he was
dead.

The method of executing those sentenced to death is curious. The accused
does not undergo a formal trial, but the evidence against him is placed
before the head chief; if he is convicted, he has an opportunity of
defending himself and of producing witnesses in his behalf. Three or
four soldiers are chosen by the chief to carry out the sentence; this
they do by chopping the victim to death with their machetes when they
catch him asleep or off his guard. Several men always perform this act,
all chopping the victim at the same time, so that no single individual
may be directly responsible for his death. Imprisonment as a punishment
for crime is unknown, fine, flogging, and death being the only three
methods employed for dealing with criminals. Fines and flogging may be
administered by the subchiefs, but sentence of death can be passed only
by the head chief. The severity of the flogging is regulated by the
nature of the offense, and after it is over the recipient is compelled
publicly to express sorrow for his crime and go around humbly kissing
the hands of all the spectators, after which he is given a large
calabash of anise to drink. The heaviest punishment is inflicted for
witchcraft or sorcery, as the _pulya_, or sorceress, is greatly dreaded
by the Indians. She is literally chopped limb from limb; but whereas the
bodies of other victims executed in this way are always buried, that of
the _pulya_ is left for the dogs and vultures to dispose of.

Military service is compulsory for all adult males among the Santa Cruz,
though many avoid such service by payment to the chief of a certain sum
in money or its equivalent. Small garrisons were kept up at Santa Cruz,
Chan Santa Cruz, Bacalar, and other Indian towns where soldiers were
permanently stationed. No uniform was provided, though many of the men
were armed with Winchester rifles. They were provided also with a ration
of corn and beans, and often took their wives along with them as cooks.


DISEASES AND MEDICINES

Indian men and women of all ages and classes, when attacked by any
serious malady, are found to be lacking in vitality and stamina; they
relinquish hope, and relax their grip on life very easily, seeming to
hold it lightly and as not worth a fight to retain. An elderly man or
woman will sometimes take to the hammock without apparent physical
symptoms of disease beyond the anemia and splenitis from which nearly
all suffer, and merely announce _Ile in cimli_, "I am going to die."
They refuse to eat, drink, or talk, wrap themselves in a sheet from head
to foot, and finally do succumb in a very short time apparently from
sheer lack of vitality and absence of desire to continue living.

Malaria is without doubt the chief scourge of the Indian's existence.
Many of the villages are built in low-lying situations, with
mosquito-breeding swamps all round them, while the scrubby bush and rank
vegetation are allowed to grow in the yards right up to the houses,
furnishing good cover and an excellent lurking place for the insects;
moreover, the Indians seldom use mosquito curtains, as they seem to have
acquired a sort of immunity to the irritation caused at night by the
noise and biting of the pests. Practically all Indians suffer from
malaria, which is the main cause of the splenic enlargement and anemia
so prevalent among them. In some cases the spleen reaches an enormous
size, nearly filling the abdominal cavity, and deaths from a slight blow
or fall, causing rupture of this organ, are by no means uncommon.
Malaria is usually treated by means of profuse sweating (_kilcabankil_),
the patient lying wrapped in a cotton sheet in the hammock, with a fire
burning beneath and drinking sudorific bush medicine. This in itself is
an excellent remedy, but in the midst of the sweat patients frequently
plunge into cold water, thus becoming thoroughly chilled, a procedure
very apt to bring on pneumonia, to which they are peculiarly subject.

The splenic enlargement is treated by applying a number of small
circular blisters (_xacal_) containing chichem juice to the skin, over
the affected organ, which seem to be remarkably efficacious in reducing
the swelling.

In the winter when the nights are cold the Indians often lie out all
night in the wet, a practice which frequently results in pneumonia and
death. Hookworms and many other varieties of intestinal parasites are
prevalent, owing to the earth-eating habits of the children, the earth
being taken usually from the immediate vicinity of the house, where pigs
and other domestic animals have their quarters. This disgusting habit no
doubt accounts in part for the swollen bellies and earthy color of many
of the children.

Smallpox (_ǩak_) invading an Indian village is a terrible scourge, far
worse than in a more civilized community of the same size, where partial
immunity has been acquired. Sometimes the whole unaffected population
depart en masse, leaving the dead unburied and the stricken lying in
their hammocks, with a supply of food and water, to do the best they can
for themselves. The Indians employ the same mode of treatment for this
disease as for malarial fever--sweating followed by immersion in cold
water, treatment which, it need hardly be said, is not infrequently
followed by disastrous results.

Venereal diseases of all kinds are remarkably rare among all the Indian
tribes. Among the Santa Cruz and Icaichè such diseases were practically
unknown. Even among the mixed breeds of British Honduras they are
comparatively rare, notwithstanding the fact that these natives have
come much in contact with people of many other races, especially of late
years with Mexican Chicleros, nearly all of whom are affected with
venereal disease in one form or another.

Simple fractures of the long bones are set very neatly and skillfully in
the following way: The fractured limb is pulled away from the body with
considerable force in order to overcome the displacement; over the
fractured bone is wound a thick layer of cotton wool, and over this are
applied a number of small round, straight sticks, completely surrounding
the limb, their centers corresponding nearly to the seat of fracture;
these are kept in place by a firm binding of henequen cord. The limb, if
an arm, is supported in a sling; if a leg, the patient is confined to
his hammock till the fracture is firmly knit. Excellent results are
secured by this method, the union being firm, and the limb nearly always
uniting in good position.

Bleeding, a favorite remedy for all complaints, is especially resorted
to in cases of headache and malarial fever. Usually the temporal vein,
less frequently one of the veins in the front of the forearm, is opened,
having been first distended with blood by tying a ligature around the
upper arm. A chip of obsidian, a sharp splinter of bone, or a snake's
tooth, serves as a crude lancet; the use of the last causes
considerable pain, but is believed to have some esoteric virtue
connected with it.

Decoctions made from the charred carcasses of animals at one time were
much employed, certain animals being regarded as specifics for certain
diseases. Thus, during an epidemic of whooping cough (_xinki sen_) a
decoction from the charred remains of the cane rat was almost
exclusively given to the children to relieve the cough, though in this
case it is difficult to trace the connection between the remedy and the
disease.

Many eye troubles are treated by placing a small rough seed beneath the
lower lid of the affected eye, where it remains for a day; when the seed
is withdrawn it is covered with mucus, to which the doctor points as the
injurious matter, the cause of all the trouble, which he has removed.

Massage is practiced chiefly for uterine and ovarian pains by the older
women, who also act as midwives; it is used also in conjunction with
kneading and manual manipulation in the cure of neuralgic pains,
strains, stiffness, and rheumatism.

In confinements, which usually take place either in the hammock or on
the floor, the dorsal position is invariably assumed. In such cases also
massage over the uterus is performed by the midwife. If the desired
results are not secured, the patient is made to vomit by thrusting a
long coil of hair down her throat, while a woman of exceptional lung
power is sent for to blow into her mouth, with the object of hastening
delivery.

The Indians use for medicinal purposes a great variety of plants which
grow in their country; some of these are purely empirical remedies;
others produce definite physiological results and are frequently used
with good effect, while a few, apparently on the assumption that
"similia similibus curantur," are employed because of some fancied
resemblance in form to the diseased part, as _xhudub pek_, twin seeds of
the size of small eggs, the milky juice of which is used as an external
application for enlarged glands and for various forms of orchitis.

The following plants are used medicinally by the Indians as remedies for
the diseases named, respectively:

      _Acitz._--The milky juice of a tree, used as an application for
      chronic sores and ulcers.

      _Acam._--The leaves of this plant are applied hot to reduce the
      swelling and relieve the pain in enlargement of the spleen and
      liver.

      _Purgacion Xiu._--An infusion made from the leaves is administered
      warm in bladder and urethral troubles.

      _Pakaal._--An infusion made from the leaves of the orange tree is
      given as a sudorific.

      _Pichi._--A paste made from the leaves of the guava is applied to
      "bay sore," a specific ulcer somewhat resembling "oriental sore."

      _Pomolche._--A mouth wash made from the milk of this tree is used
      in cases of stomatitis and ulceration of the mouth.

      _Quimbombo._--The wild okra is greatly esteemed as an external
      application in cases of snake bite.

      _Sisim._--An infusion made from the leaves is used as a sudorific
      in cases of malarial fever.

      _Sicilpuz._--A yellowish fruit sometimes used as a purgative.

      _Cabalpixoy._--The fruit of this tree is given in cases of
      diarrhea, and an infusion made from the bark is used in diarrhea
      and dysentery.

      _Claudiosa Xiu._--An infusion made from the whole bush is greatly
      esteemed as a bath and lotion in all uterine and ovarian
      complaints.

      _Chalche._--The spinous leaf of this plant is used as a local
      application to relieve neuralgic pains, and an infusion made from
      the leaves is given for rheumatism.

      _Chamico._--An infusion made from the leaves of the convolvulus
      mixed with other leaves is given to relieve asthma and bronchial
      catarrh.

      _Chaac._--The arrowroot, eaten raw, is regarded as a useful remedy
      in all bladder and urethral complaints.

      _CuƆuc._--The wood, ground into a paste, is applied to the heads
      of small children suffering from fever and convulsions.

      _Ruda._--The leaves of this plant are universally used as an
      external application for children suffering from convulsions, and
      frequently in the same manner for the relief of almost any nervous
      complaint in adults.

      _Pica pica._--A sort of cowhage which, mixed with atol or some
      corn beverage, is largely used as a vermifuge for children.


GAMES

Both children and adults play many games, most of which have probably
been introduced since the conquest. A favorite among these is a game
known as _tak in kul_, in which a number of players stand in a row with
their hands behind their backs while one, who holds a small pottery disk
in his hand, stands behind the row, another standing in front. The one
holding the disk places it in the hands of one of those in the line, who
in turn passes it to his neighbor, so that it travels rapidly up and
down the line. The player in front has to guess in whose hand the disk
is at the moment of guessing. If he is right, the holder of the disk has
to come in front while the one who guessed correctly joins the line.

_Chac_ is a sort of "knucklebones," played with pottery disks, which are
tossed from the palm to the back of the hand and back again; the one who
drops fewest disks in a given number of double throws wins the game.

The boys make little bows (_pohoche_) and arrows (_hul_) tipped with
black wax, with which they play war and hunting games.

A seesaw made from a small tree balanced on a stump is popular, as is
also a sort of merry-go-round constructed from a cross of poles fixed on
top of a stump by means of a wooden pin, which rotates freely. The
children sit at the extreme ends of the poles and make the contrivance
rotate by kicking against the ground vigorously at intervals as they go
around.

The bull roarer, made from a dry seed pod, is popular in some villages
and is probably one of the few toys used by the natives before the
conquest.

Cricket, baseball, marbles, kites, and spinning tops have been
introduced among the Indians of British Honduras, and all have their
devotees.


RELIGION

The Indians, who are extremely superstitious, believe that the air is
full of _pishan_, or souls of the dead. They imagine that these souls
are at liberty at all times to return to earth, and that at certain
seasons they are compelled to do so. They are regarded as being capable
of enjoying the spirit, though not the substance, of food or drink
provided for them. Some of these _pishan_ the Indians believe to be
friendly and some inimical to mortals. They believe also in spirits,
usually mischievous or harmful, known as _xtabai_, who often take the
form of beautiful women, though they have never been human. The natives
will whisper a message into the ear of a corpse with the certainty of
having it conveyed to a friend or relative in the next world. They
firmly believe that the clay images of the gods upon incense burners, at
one time found in considerable numbers in forests which had been uncut
since the days of their ancestors, live, walk about, and dance at
certain seasons. Another belief held by the Indians is that the images
of Christian saints are endowed at times with life and perform acts
desired by their devotees. A celebrated wooden image, supposed to
represent San Bernardo, was credited with considerable powers in this
respect, and when an Indian wanted rain for his milpa, the return of an
errant wife, or any similar blessing, he would come and pray to the
image to obtain it for him. On one occasion an Indian came asking the
saint to aid him in the recovery of pigs which he had lost, and on
returning to his village found that the pigs had arrived home before
him. Next day he returned with the intention of making an offering to
the saint, and incidentally to the owner of the house where the image
was kept. He found the poor Santo with torn clothes and many burs
sticking all over him. On inquiring how this happened he was informed
that the saint had been out in the bush hunting for pigs, a quest which
had given him a great deal of trouble before he could find and drive
them home, and that when he got back he was tired out, his clothes torn
by thorns, and covered with burs--an explanation with which the Indian
was perfectly satisfied.

The men are very unwilling to dig either in ancient mounds or ruins, as
they are afraid of being haunted by the _pishan_ of those whose remains
they may disturb; and nothing will induce them to go into caves or
burial chambers in mounds. Many curious superstitions hang about the
ruins found throughout the country. I was assured by an Indian at Benque
Viejo that he had gone on one occasion to the ruins situated near the
village, and seeing a pigeon seated on a tree, raised his gun to shoot
it; before he could do so, however, the pigeon turned into a cock, and
this almost immediately into an eagle, which flew at him, driving him
away. There is another superstition about these ruins to the effect that
when the first settlers came to Benque Viejo they wished to build the
village near the ruins, where the land is very good for growing corn,
but were repeatedly driven off by a little old man with a long gray
beard. At last, giving up the idea, they contented themselves with the
present site for the village.

For many years, between the expulsion of the Yucatecans from Bacalar by
the Indians and the conquest of the latter by the Mexican troops, some
12 years ago, no Catholic priests were permitted to visit the Santa Cruz
country. The Indians, however, appointed priests from among themselves,
who carried out, so far as can be ascertained from those of their number
who left the territory and settled in British Honduras, a sort of
travesty of the rites of the Roman Catholic Church freely interspersed
with many of those of their ancient religion, which had survived. The
headquarters of this religious cult was the capital, where it centered
around what was known as the "Santa Cruz," a plain wooden cross, 2 to 3
feet high, which had probably been removed from some church after the
expulsion of the Spaniards. This cross was supposed to be gifted with
the power of speech (a belief arising no doubt from the exercise of
ventriloquial powers by one of the priests), and acted as a sort of
oracle, to whom all matters of importance--civil, military, and
religious--were submitted for decision. It need hardly be said that the
cross never failed to return an answer to all these questions, in entire
conformity with the wishes of the chief.[2]

The Indians here under consideration occupy an intermediate position
between the civilized Maya of northern Yucatan, who have lost nearly
all tradition and traces of their former civilization, and the
Lacandones of the Usumasintla Valley, who have probably changed but
little in their customs and religious observances since the conquest.
Nominally they are Christians, but the longer one lives among them,
and the better one gets to know them, the more he realizes that their
Christianity is to a great extent merely a thin veneer, and that
fundamentally their religious conceptions and even their ritual and
ceremonies are survivals--degenerate, much changed, and with most
of their significance lost--but still survivals of those of their
ancestors of pre-Columbian days. To Christianity, not as a separate
religion, but as a graft on that which they already practiced, they
seem to have taken kindly from the first; and at the present day, as
will be seen, the sun god, the rain god, St. Laurence, and Santa Clara
may all be invoked in the same prayer, while the Cross is substituted
in most of the ceremonies for the images of the old gods, though many
of the latter are called on by name. The four principal religious
ceremonies of the Indians are, as might be supposed, closely associated
with agriculture, especially with the corn crop. The first of these
ceremonies takes place at the cutting of the bush in which the corn
plantation is to be made, the second at the planting of the corn, the
third during its ripening, and the fourth at harvest time. Of these the
third, known as the _Cha chac_, which takes place during the ripening
of the corn, and whose object is to secure sufficient rain for that
purpose, is by far the most important, and it alone will be described,
as it embraces the offerings and ritual of all the other ceremonies.

  [Illustration: FIG. 11.--Chichanha Indian priest in front of altar at
                           Cha chac ceremony.]

The day previous to the ceremony the men of the family prepared
the _pib_, an oblong hole in the ground, in which the various corn
offerings were to be baked, while during the night the women were busy
grinding corn to make masa (a thick paste of ground maize) and pumpkin
seeds to make _sikil_. Very early in the morning of the day of the
ceremony the priest with his assistant arrived at the house of the
giver. This priest called himself _men_, but was called by the owner
a _chac_, while the Chichanha priest called himself an _ah kin_. The
Indians chose a site in the midst of a grove of large trees. After
clearing away the undergrowth they swept clean a circular space about
25 feet in diameter. In this they proceeded to erect two rude huts,
one 12 feet the other 6 feet square; both were thatched with huano
leaf, and the floor of the smaller hut was covered with wild plantain
leaves. In the center of the larger hut was erected a rough altar 6 by
4 feet and 4 feet 6 inches high, built of sticks bound together with
bejuco (fig. 11). The central part of this altar was covered by an
arch of "jabin" branches with the leaves still attached. About a dozen
small calabashes in their ring supports (Maya _chuyub_) were placed on
the altar, and three more were hung to a string passing from the side
of the shed to a post a few yards away. The masa prepared the previous
night was then brought out in four large calabashes, two of these
being placed under the altar and two on top of it; a large calabash of
_sikil_ and one of water were also placed on the altar and a jar of
_balchè_ (a drink made of fermented honey in which is soaked the bark
of a tree) beneath it.

  [Illustration: FIG. 12.--Priest tracing cross on cake and filling it
                           in with sikil.]

Beneath the suspended calabashes was placed a small table containing
piles of tortillas and calabashes of masa and water. In carrying out
this ceremony it is essential that everything used in it be perfectly
fresh and new; the leaves, sticks, bejuco, and jabin must be freshly
cut, and the masa, _sikil_, _balchè_, and even the calabashes must be
freshly made. The masa was taken from the large to the small shed,
where the priest and several male members of the family sat around
it. After flattening out a small ball of the masa the priest placed
it on a square of plantain leaves and poured over it a little _sikil_
(a thin paste made of ground pumpkin seed and water). Then the next
man flattened out a piece of masa, which he placed over the _sikil,_
and the process was continued until a cake was formed containing 5
to 13 alternating layers of masa and _sikil_. On top of each cake,
as it was completed, the priest traced with his forefinger a cross
surrounded with holes; these were first partly filled with _balchè_,
which was allowed to soak into the cake, after which they were filled
completely with _sikil_, whereupon the whole cake was carefully tied up
in plantain leaf, with an outer covering of palm leaf (fig. 12). These
cakes are known as _tutiua_; their number is generally gauged by the
number of participants in the ceremony. When _sikil_ is not available,
a paste of ground black beans is used; in this case the cakes are known
as _buliua_ (Maya _bul_, "bean"; _ua_, "bread"). The priest next made
a deep depression in a ball of masa about the size of a tennis ball,
which he filled with _sikil_, covering it with the masa, so as to leave
a ball of masa with a core of _sikil_.

  [Illustration: FIG. 13.--Sacrificing a turkey at the Cha chac
                           ceremony.]

A number of these balls, known as _yokua_, were made, each wrapped in
plantain leaves. When finished, all of them were wrapped in a large
palm leaf and tied into a bundle with split palm-leaf strands. Two more
_tutiua_ were next made, and lastly all the masa and _sikil_ left were
mixed together with a few ounces of salt. After being well kneaded
this mass was divided into two portions, each of which was tied up in
plantain and palm leaf coverings. In the meantime some members of the
family had filled the _pib_ or oven with firewood, over which they
placed a layer of small blocks of stone. The priest next made a bowl
of _sachà_ (literally "white water," a drink made from ground corn
and water), with which he filled the small calabashes on the altar,
as well as the suspended calabashes; these he explained were for the
_tuyun pishan_, or solitary souls. A turkey and four fowls were then
placed in front of the altar, alive, while the priest lighted a black
wax candle by blowing a piece of glowing wood to a flame; this candle
he placed upon the altar. He next took up the turkey, around whose neck
the assistant had placed a wreath of jabin leaves, and poured a little
_balchè_ down its throat, its legs being held by the assistant (fig.
13). While doing this the priest murmured the following prayer:

     In kubic ti hahnal cichpan colel, ti San Pedro, San Pablo, San
     Francisco.

                              _Translation_

     I offer a repast to the beautiful mistress, to San Pedro, San
     Pablo, San Francisco.

The turkey and the other fowls were then killed by having their necks
wrung, and the carcasses of all five were removed to the house to be
prepared by the women. The various bundles of masa and _sikil_ in
their leaf coverings were next removed to the _pib_, where the fire
had burned itself out, leaving the hole half full of ashes and red-hot
stones. A lining of plantain bark was laid over the stones, upon which
the bundles were arranged; over these were placed more hot stones and
over the latter palm leaves; lastly, the earth which had been dug from
the _pib_ was raked over all. The priest next took a small quantity of
the _sachà_ from a calabash, in a jabin leaf, and scattered it on the
ground in three directions, meanwhile murmuring this prayer:

     Cin kubic ti atepalob, ti noh yum kab yetel uahmetan, atepalob,
     tiaca tzib nah.

                              _Translation_

     I offer to the majestic ones, to the great lord, corn cake, great
     ones. [_Tiaca tzib nah_ is somewhat obscure. The reading,
     according to Don Juan Martinez, of Merida, should be _tia ca
     Ɔib-nah_.]

Afterward the priest repeated the performance with _sachà_ from the
calabashes on the altar, and lastly with some from the calabashes of
the _tuyun pishan_. The _sachà_ was then distributed in calabashes to
the participants, it being essential that every drop of it be drunk.
After a wait of about an hour all proceeded to the _pib_, which,
after it had been sprinkled by the priest with _balchè_ from a small
calabash, was opened. The red-hot leaf-wrapped bundles were carried
to the small shed, where the coverings were removed, exposing the
_tutiua_ and _yokua_, crisp, brown, and hot. These were placed upon the
altar, with the exception of one _tutiua_, which was tied to the string
holding the calabashes of the _tuyun pishan_. The cakes made from
the remainder of the masa and _sikil_ were now crumbled into a large
calabash and mixed with another large calabash of _kool_ (a reddish
liquid made from water, ground corn, black pepper, and achiote). The
two mixtures were stirred with a peeled wand of jabin till they formed
a thick paste known as _sopas_. While the _sopas_ was being made the
hearts, heads, and intestines of the fowls were removed to the _pib_
where they were buried, lest some animal by eating them should defile
the offering. The cooked and dismembered turkey and other fowls were
brought out to the small shed in calabashes; the livers, gizzards, and
immature eggs were chopped up fine and well mixed with the _sopas_. A
small calabash full of this mixture was placed with the calabashes of
the _tuyun pishan_, while the rest, in a large calabash, the fowls'
claws standing upright in it, was placed upon the altar, together with
the dismembered birds wrapped in a clean cotton cloth. The priest next
removed some _balchè_ from the jar and filled a calabash, which he
placed upon the altar, as he did so murmuring these prayers:

     Ea, in cichpan colel kanleoox, yetel bacan tech in cichkelem tat
     yum San Isidro, ah kolkal, yetel bacan tech yum kankin, culucbalech
     ti likin, yetel bacan in chanttupchaac, culucbal chumuc caan, ti
     likin, yetel bacan yum canchaacoob; kin kubic yetel bacan ahooil
     atepalo chumuc caan, yetel bacan tech in cichkelem tata ahcanan
     kakabool, yetel bacan tech in cichkelem tata Cakaal Uxmal, yetel
     bacan tech in cichpan colel Santa Clara, yetel bacan tech in
     cichkelem tata yum xualakinik, yetel bacan tech in cichpan colel
     Xhelik, yetel bacan tech in cichkelem tatayum Santo Lorenzo, yetel
     bacan tech in cichpan colel Guadelupe, yetel bacan tech tun yum
     Mosonikoob, meyahnaheex ichil cool kat tocah. Cin kubic bacan letie
     Santo Gracia, utial a nahmateex, yetel bacan tech u nohchi Santo
     uai yokol cab halibe in yumen sates ten in cipil. Minan a tzul
     pachkeech letie Santo Pishan, Ooki in mentic letie Santo Promicia.

                              _Translation_

     Now my beautiful lady of the yellow-leaf breadnut, as well as you,
     my handsome father San Isidro, tiller of the earth; as well as
     you, lord sun, who art seated at the east; as well as you,
     Chanttupchaac, who art seated in the middle of the heavens, in the
     east; as well as you, Yumcanchaacoob: I deliver to you, with the
     majestic servants in the middle of the heavens. As well as you, my
     handsome father, Ahcanankakabool; as well as you, my handsome
     father Cakaal Uxmaal; as well as you, my beautiful lady Santa
     Clara; as well as you, my handsome father Xualakinik; as well as
     you, my beautiful lady Xhelik; as well as you, my handsome father
     San Lorenzo; as well as you, my beautiful lady of Guadelupe; as
     well as you, Lord Mosonicoob, that blows within the milpa when it
     is burnt. I deliver then to you this Holy Grace, that you may
     taste it, and because you are the greatest Santos on earth. That
     is all my master. Pardon my sins; you have not to follow the holy
     souls, because I have made this holy offering.

     Cin Kubic ti nah tatail, ti u cahil San Roque, u cahil Patchacan,
     ti Chan Sapote.

                              _Translation_

     I offer you, great father, for your town of San Roque, your town
     of Patchacan, and Chan Sapote.

The assistant then brought up some burning incense (_pom_) on a piece
of plantain bark, which the priest took, and after waving it about
for a short time placed it upon the altar, after which he dipped out
a small portion of _balchè_ and scattered it in three directions,
murmuring while doing so the following prayer:

     Noh Nah ti Uxmal, ti atepaloob Ixcabach Chen Mani, ti Xpanterashan,
     Chacanchi, Chacantoc, ti Xnocachan, Xcunya, Yaxutzub, Yaxaban, ti
     atepaloob.

                              _Translation_

     Great house of Uxmal, of the majestic Ixcabach, Chen Mani, of
     Xpanterashan, Chacanchi, Chacantoc, of Xnocachan Xcunya, Yaxatzub
     Yaxaban of the majestic ones.

A small portion of _balchè_ was next passed around to each of the
participants, the priest again scattering a little on the ground and
repeating the prayer. The calabash, which was now nearly empty, was
then removed to the house for the benefit of the women. It was soon
brought back by the assistant and refilled from the jar, and the same
procedure gone through again. This was repeated till no more _balchè_
remained to be drunk. The priest then scattered some of the _sopas_
in four directions, using one of the fowls' claws to scoop it up from
the calabash, after which what remained of the _sopas_ was divided
up among the participants, each one being given a calabash in which
a fowl's claw was placed for use as a fork. A small quantity of the
mixture which remained was taken to the house for use of the women.
Lastly the priest removed the _tutiua_ and _yokua_ from the altar, and
divided these among the participants, giving each one at the same time
a corn-husk cigarette. The ceremony was now finished, and the last
act was completely to destroy all the objects used in it, including
buildings, altar, calabashes, and _chuyubs_; this was done by fire.

This Cha chac ceremony as performed by the Santa Cruz and Icaichè
Indians bears a strong resemblance to certain ceremonies performed
before the conquest, in honor of the Chacs, or Rain gods, and also to
ceremonies carried out at the present day by the Lacandon Indians.

The names given to the modern priests were, according to Landa, all
in use in his day. The Chacs were four old men chosen to assist the
priests.[22] The _men_ was an inferior priest or sorcerer, while the
name _Ahkin_[4] was applied after the conquest, both to their own
and to Christian priests by the Maya. Landa also mentions (Chap. XL,
p. 260) a fiesta given to the Chacs, in conjunction with other gods,
held in one of the plantations, when the offerings were consumed by
the people after being first presented to the gods; these offerings
consisted of turkeys and other fowls, corn cake, _sikil_, and
_posol_,[5] all of which are used in the modern Maya Cha chac.

The god Yumcanchacoob (Lord of all the Chacs) of the Santa Cruz
probably corresponds to Nohochyumchac (Great Lord Chac) of the
Lacandones, as does the Ahcanankakabol (keeper of the woods) of
the Santa Cruz, to the Kanancash of the Lacandones, whose name has
practically the same significance. A belief in _Xtabai_, or spirits,
and _Ikoob_, or Wind gods, seems common alike to the Santa Cruz, the
Lacandones, and the Indians of Yucatan.




PART 2. MOUND EXCAVATION IN THE EASTERN MAYA AREA




INTRODUCTION


CLASSIFICATION OF THE MOUNDS

In the following pages is a description of the mounds opened during
the last few years in that part of the Maya area now constituting
British Honduras, the southern part of Yucatan, and the eastern border
of Guatemala (pl. 7). For descriptive purposes these mounds may be
divided, according to their probable uses, into six main groups:

_1. Sepulchral Mounds._--This group includes mounds which, originally
constructed for other purposes, were afterwards used as burial sites.

_2. Refuse Mounds._--This group includes kitchen middens, shell heaps,
deposits of waste material remaining after the manufacture of lime, and
heaps of stones gathered from the surface of the ground.

_3. Foundation Mounds._--As the buildings themselves invariably stood
on the summits of flat-topped mounds, such mounds, capped with the
débris of the earlier structures, formed the bases of later ones.

_4. Defensive Mounds._--Some of these mounds were crescent-shaped;
others were in the form of a horseshoe.

_5. Lookout Mounds._--These mounds extend in chains, at intervals of 6
to 12 miles, along the coast and up some of the rivers; they are lofty,
steep-sided, and usually form the nuclei of groups of other mounds.
As a rule they contain neither human remains nor artifacts, though in
one or two of them superficial interments seem to have been made at a
comparatively late date.

_6. Mounds of Uncertain Use._--No trace of human interment was found
in these mounds. Many of them are too small at the summit to have
supported buildings, and it seems probable that they are sepulchral
mounds, in which no stone, pottery, or other indestructible objects
were placed with the corpse, and in which the bones have entirely
disintegrated. The larger mounds of this class, many of them flat
topped, are carefully constructed of blocks of limestone, marl dust,
and earth, and no doubt at one time served as bases for buildings
either small temples or houses--which, being built of wood, have long
since vanished.

Most of the mounds are distributed in small and large groups, the
latter usually containing one or more examples of each class, the
former consisting for the greater part of small burial mounds, probably
of late date, as they are less carefully constructed than the mounds of
the larger groups, and the objects which they contain are of rougher
and cruder workmanship.

The burial mounds comprise more than half of all the mounds opened,
followed in order of numbers by (a) foundation mounds; (b) mounds of
uncertain use; (c) refuse mounds; (d) lookout mounds; (e) defensive
mounds.

It has been found that, as a rule, rich land contains many mounds;
poor land, fewer; and sour-grass savannah, pine ridge, and swamp, none
at all. The better the land the more numerous the mounds scattered
over it, as is natural, since the more fertile the land the denser
the population it would sustain. Not all the mounds opened have been
described, as small burial mounds, especially in the same group, in
both construction and contents, resemble one another closely, as do
foundation mounds also.

This part of the Maya area must either have been occupied during
a very considerable period or at one time must have supported a
dense population, as wherever it is possible to cultivate the soil,
especially to raise maize, mounds are to be found in great abundance;
moreover, the surface everywhere bears such indestructible rubbish
as potsherds, flint chips, and fragments of obsidian knives. It
would probably be impossible to find anywhere in this area an acre
of moderately good land on which dozens of such objects could not
be discovered. This indicates that what is now dense tropical bush,
with a few small Indian villages scattered through it at considerable
intervals, was at one time a highly cultivated and thickly populated
country.

Referring to Yucatan before the conquest, Landa uses the words, "toda
la tierra parescia un pueblo;"[6] while 200 years after the conquest
Villagutierre[7] mentions by name 10 tribes with whom the Itzas were at
war, who lived to the east of the lagoon, nine days' journey away--in
a region corresponding to the territory of coastal tribes of British
Honduras and Quintana Roo.


ANCIENT INHABITANTS OF THE REGION

From the contents of the mounds we are able to deduce many valuable
facts relating to the physical appearance, social life, religion, and
art of the former inhabitants of this area.


PHYSICAL APPEARANCE

A very accurate idea of the physical appearance of these people may be
derived from the figurines, paintings, stucco moldings, and skeletons
found in the mounds. It would appear that they very closely resembled
the modern Maya Indians.[8] They were broad of face, with small
features and rather high cheek bones; without beard or mustache, but
with straight, black, coarse hair, which was allowed by both men and
women to grow long.

The skull was naturally brachicephalic, and as this characteristic
was (and is now by the Maya) admired, it seems to have been almost
invariably accentuated artificially by pressure applied over the
occipital and frontal regions during early infancy.[9] The average
cephalic index of eight skulls removed from the mounds was found to be
110. The following list gives the average lengths of a number of bones
of adults taken from the mounds, though in no case were all the bones
of one individual found in a sufficiently perfect condition to permit
of their accurate measurement:

    Humerus, 29.21 cm.

    Ulna, 25.38 cm.

    First phalanx (little finger), 3.04 cm.

    Femur, 36.83 cm.

    Tibia, 33.27 cm.

    Metatarsal bone of great toe, 5.33 cm.

The bones are small, the ridges for muscular attachment not well
marked, and the phalanges, metacarpal, and metatarsal bones small
and delicate, indicating a body with rounded contours, poor muscular
development, and small extremities. The front teeth in some cases were
filed, in others filled with round plugs of obsidian, iron pyrites, or
jadeite, for ornamental purposes.


DRESS

Among the lower class the men seem to have worn no garment except the
_maxtli_, consisting of a loin-cloth wound several times around the
waist, the ends hanging down in front and behind, like small aprons.
The women wore two garments, similar to those of the modern Maya, the
_huipil_, or loose, sleeveless upper garment reaching to the hips (at
the present this is worn longer, reaching well below the knees) and
a short, loose skirt, both of cotton, and both embroidered in colors
at the borders.[10] The warriors wore in addition to the _maxtli_ a
breastplate of thick quilted cotton, saturated with salt, arrow and
spear proof, and ornamented with bows, studs, and tassels. To its
upper border was attached a hollow bar, through which passed a cord,
continued round the back of the neck, holding the breastplate in place.

Both warriors and priests wore very elaborate headdresses. Those of the
former were decorated with plumes of feathers and many of them held in
front the head of some animal carved in wood,[11] as the jaguar, eagle,
peccary, snake, or alligator. Some of the headdresses of the priests
were shaped like a bishop's miter, while others resembled the Egyptian
headdress. All classes wore sandals of leather or platted henequen
fiber. The ornaments worn consisted of large circular ear plugs of
shell, greenstone, or pottery, many with a tassel dependent from the
center; studlike labrets at each side of the mouth; and occasional
triangular ornaments attached on each ala of the nose. Round the neck
were worn strings of beads, some in the form of human or animal heads,
others with a gorget of greenstone or shell in the form of a human
mask dependent from them. Wristlets and anklets of large oval beads,
fastened with ornamental loops, were common, and copper finger rings
have been found on two occasions, though it is possible that these
may not have been introduced till after the conquest. Among the upper
classes the ornaments were made from jade, greenstone, iron pyrites,
obsidian, mother-of-pearl, and copper; among the lower, from pottery,
shell, and stone.


WEAPONS

The offensive weapons of the natives here dealt with consisted of flint
and obsidian tipped arrows,[12] javelins, and spears, flint and stone
axes, with slingstones, and stone-headed clubs, made for the most part
of hard limestone. Their defensive weapons were small circular shields
of leather-covered wickerwork and thick cotton breastplates.


HOUSES

The lower classes probably lived exclusively in thatched pimento-walled
houses, identical in construction with those used by the Maya of the
present day; naturally, these have completely disappeared, but the
former sites of villages composed of such huts may easily be recognized
by the presence of half-choked wells and the great number of malacates,
broken pots, weapons, implements, ornaments, and rubbing stones, which
are to be found scattered all over them. The priests, caciques, and
upper classes doubtless lived in the stone houses, the remains of
which lie buried in considerable numbers in the mounds. The walls of
these houses were of stucco-covered stone and lime, the floors of hard
cement, and the roofs, no doubt, of beams and thatch, as many of them
are too wide to have been covered by the so-called "American arch."

Many of these buildings were doubtless used as temples, but probably
the majority of them were private houses.[13] In one of them an
interment had taken place beneath the floor of the house before the
structure was destroyed.[14]


ARTS

The former inhabitants of this part of the Maya area do not seem
to have fallen far behind those of northern Yucatan in the arts of
sculpture upon stone, stucco molding, mural painting, ceramics, and the
manufacture of stone implements and weapons, as excellent examples in
all these fields have been found.

At Seibal, Holmul, Naranjo, and Benque Viejo, cities of the old
Empire lying along the British Honduras-Guatemala frontier, examples
of sculptured stelæ and altars have been found, equal in fineness of
workmanship to those found at any other site within the Maya area. The
molded stucco figures at Pueblo Nuevo are beautifully executed, while
the painted stucco upon the temple walls at Santa Rita is probably the
finest example of this kind of decoration yet brought to light in the
whole Maya area. The colors used (green, yellow, red, blue, black, and
white) seem to have been derived from colored earths and vegetal dyes
ground to a paste in small shallow stone mortars with spatulate flint
grinders, which have been found with traces of paint still adhering to
them. Ornaments in the form of human and animal faces and heads nicely
cut from jadeite and greenstone are not uncommon. Some bear incised
hieroglyphic inscriptions. The greenstone shell from Kendal, described
later on, in its fineness of finish and accurate imitation of the
natural form, is a remarkable example of gem cutting.

Most of the domestic pottery used was of a rather coarse hard red
ware. This comprises large amphora-like water jars, shallow dishes,
saucers, and bowls, used probably to hold food; cooking pots of various
sizes and shapes, chocolate pots with upright spouts, and disks for
baking tortillas. In addition to these, thick brittle vessels of very
coarse pottery, some of exceptionally large size, are found, which were
probably used as receptacles for corn, beans, pepper, and other light
dry substances. Of the finer kinds of pottery some are ornamented with
incised devices, executed after the vessels had been fired, others are
covered with devices in polychrome, and still others with ornaments
molded while the clay was plastic. Lastly, these three methods, or any
two of them, may be combined in the decoration of any one vessel.

The objects most frequently depicted on the vases are human heads,
simple glyphs, animal and mythological figures, and flowers. Most of
the vessels are polished, some of them to a high degree, but the art
of glazing does not seem to have been understood. The finer kinds of
pottery are thin, tough, light, and very hard. The appliqué work,
displayed best in incense burners, upon which the figure of the god
in high relief is built up bit by bit, is rather coarse, but in some
examples very effective. Stone implements and weapons of great variety
have been discovered, including ax, spear, javelin, and arrowheads,
knives, clubs, throwing stones, hammerstones, scrapers, chisels,
borers, paint and corn grinders, fiber cleaners, and many others.
Flint, chert, obsidian, greenstone, and limestone were the materials
most commonly used in the manufacture of implements and weapons. Very
remarkable eccentrically shaped objects, including crosses, crescents,
rings, and a variety of other forms, chipped with great care and
precision, from flint, chert, and obsidian, are also found, though not
in great numbers. They seem to be confined almost exclusively to this
part of the Maya area.


MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS

With the exception of clay whistles of from one to four notes, no
musical instruments have been found in the mounds, unless the hollow
cylinder (10-1/2 inches high by 4 inches in diameter) from Yalloch may
be regarded as a small hand drum similar to those mentioned by Landa
as having been in use at the time of the conquest,[15] and somewhat
resembling the clay jar with a piece of gibnut hide stretched over the
opening for a head, still in use as a drum among the Lacandones.[16]
The late Sir Alfred Moloney obtained in the village of Succots a
_tunkul_, or wooden drum, with two rubber-tipped drumsticks, which
had been brought by the Indians from Guatemala at the time of their
emigration from that country. This had been handed down from Alcalde to
Alcalde from time immemorial, and was used to summon the villagers on
special occasions, as a fire or the election of new Alcaldes.


FOOD

The staple article of diet among the ancient Maya seems to have been
maize, as it is at the present day among their descendants. Numbers
of rubbing-stones and rubbers, both broken and whole, are found in
the mounds, as are also the clay disks used for baking corn cakes.
The bones of various animals, which had probably been used for food,
are also found; among these are the peccary, gibnut, armadillo, puma,
tapir, and manatee, together with woula (snake), alligator, and (of
birds) the curassow and wild turkey. Shells of the conch, cockle,
oyster, and freshwater snail are also found in abundance. The Maya
probably kept small domestic animals and birds,[17] as great numbers of
rough stone troughs are found in the mounds, precisely similar to those
manufactured and used by the modern Maya Indians for watering their
fowls, while eggs, with turkeys and other birds, have been found, held
in the hands of figurines upon the incense burners, as offerings to the
gods. They seem to have made periodical expeditions to the cays and
islands off the coast to fish and collect shellfish, as quantities of
net-sinkers, flint chips, potsherds, and broken javelin heads are found
on many of the cays. But few mounds, however, which give evidence of
permanent human occupancy have been discovered in this situation.


SPINNING AND WEAVING

Judging by the great number of spindle-whorls found in the mounds and
on village sites, cotton spinning must have been practically universal
among the women. Oval perforated stones of a size suitable for loom
weights have been found, and it is probable that they were used as
such, as they do not seem to be adapted to any other purpose. With this
exception we learn nothing of the art of weaving from the contents of
the mounds. Henequen fiber was doubtless used for the manufacture of
rope, mats, hammocks, and other objects, as grooved flat stones for
beating the pulp from the fiber are common.


GAMES

The appliances for at least two distinct games have been found.[18]
The first consists of a large spherical block of limestone, nicely
polished, and about 1 foot in diameter, found associated with 6 to 12
smaller spherical stones, each about 3 inches in diameter, of very
light material somewhat resembling pumice stone. The second consists
of a number of small disks of shell, about three-fourths of an inch
in diameter. Collections of these have been found together on several
occasions; they might have been used as beads or ornaments but for
the fact that they are neither perforated nor decorated with incised
figures as shell beads usually are.


RELIGION

Of the 15 gods of the codices classified by Schellhas five may be
recognized in this area with a fair degree of certainty. God A, the god
of death, in the form of a human skull, decorates the outside of not
a few small pottery vessels, and is depicted upon the painted stucco
wall at Santa Rita. God B, the long-nosed god, is usually identified
with Cuculcan. Representations of this god are found throughout the
whole area in great abundance, painted upon pottery and stucco,
incised on bone and stone, and modeled in clay. This god is associated
with the cities of Chichen Itza and Mayapan, and is supposed to have
entered Yucatan from the west; indeed it is possible that he may
originally have been the leader of one of the Maya immigrations from
that direction. He appears to have been by far the most popular and
generally worshiped deity in this area, and it is his image which is
found on nearly half of all the incense burners discovered. God D,
probably Itzamna, appears in the codices as an old man with a Roman
nose, shrunken cheeks, toothless jaws, and a peculiar scroll-like
ornament beneath the eye, to the lower border of which are attached
two or three small circles. In some representations a single tooth
projects from the upper jaw, and in a few the face is bearded. This
god is not infrequently found associated with the serpent. A typical
representation of him is seen upon the Santa Rita temple wall;[19]
here he is depicted standing upon intertwined serpents, holding in his
right hand a feather-plumed serpent. This god is represented upon some
incense burners, and is found not infrequently associated with Cuculcan.

God K, the god with an elaborate foliated nose, often closely
associated with God B, his face in some cases forming the headdress
ornament of the latter god, is unmistakably depicted upon the Santa
Rita temple wall.[20] God P, the Frog god, is found on some small
pottery vases, and on a few incense burners. Nothing found in the
mounds proves definitely the practice of human sacrifice in this area,
but that it existed is almost certain, as Villagutierre refers to it as
prevalent among the Itza of Peten at the time of their conquest,[21] at
the end of the seventeenth century, and Landa mentions it as occurring
among the Maya at the time of the coming of the Spaniards.[22] Near
the headwaters of the Rio Hondo a mound was opened, which contained,
in a stone-walled chamber, a number of human skulls unaccompanied by
other bones. It is possible that these may have been the remains of
sacrificial victims, as it was customary to remove the head of the
victim after death, which became the perquisite of the priests.

Human sacrifice among the Maya was probably a somewhat rare event,
taking place only on extraordinary special occasions, as in times of
public calamity--for example, during the prevalence of famine, war,
or pestilence--when it was felt that a special propitiatory offering
to the god was called for. This practice was confined to one, or at
most to a very small number of victims, never reaching the proportions
which it did among the Aztec, by whom it was probably introduced
into Yucatan. The main offering of the Maya to their gods seems to
have consisted of an incense composed of copal gum and aromatic
substances. Landa mentions this as largely employed at the time of the
conquest; Villagutierre encountered it among the Itza at the end of
the seventeenth century; and Tozzer found it in use among the Lacandon
Indians at the present day. The incense itself has been found all over
this area, as well as great numbers of incense burners.

In addition to incense, the blood of fish, birds, and animals was
smeared over the images of the gods, as an offering, together with
human blood obtained by cutting the ears, tongue, genitals, and other
parts of the body. The hearts of various animals, together with live
and dead animals (some cooked and some raw) and all kinds of foods and
drinks in use among the people,[23] were also employed as offerings to
the gods. In the hands of figurines upon the incense burners are found,
modeled in clay, fruit, flowers, eggs, cakes, birds, small animals, and
other objects, all evidently intended for the same purpose.


CHRONOLOGY

Three distinct periods of Mayan civilization seem to be represented
in this area. The center of the earliest of these was along the Rio
Grande, in southern British Honduras, within 20 miles of the Guatemala
frontier, where the Leyden Plate was discovered, upon which is
inscribed the earliest but one known Maya date--namely, Cycle 8, Katun
14, Tun 3, Uinal 1, Kin 12. If the massive stone-faced pyramids and
terraces of these ruins are contemporaneous with the Leyden Plate, as
seems possible, they must be reckoned among the earliest monuments of
the first, or southern Maya, civilization. The Benque Viejo temple, in
the extreme western part of British Honduras, comes next in point of
time. This was almost certainly contemporaneous with its near neighbor,
Naranjo, where the earliest Initial Series found is 9.10.10.0.0, and
the latest 9.19.10.0.0, giving the city an age of at least 9 katuns,
or 180 years. It will be seen that the difference between the Leyden
tablet date and the earliest recorded date at Naranjo is rather more
than 16 katuns, or 320 years.

The latest of all the sites is undoubtedly Santa Rita, which shows
strong Mexican influence; this belongs to the second era of Maya
civilization, which reached its highest development in Yucatan and
the northern cities. Excluding the Tuluum Stela, the date upon which,
9.6.10.0.0, is almost certainly not contemporaneous,[24] the only
Initial Series deciphered with certainty in Yucatan up to the present
time is that at Chichen Itza, 10.2.9.1.9, nearly 3 katuns, or 60 years,
later than the latest at Naranjo; but probably the Santa Rita site
is much later in date than this, and if we may judge by the objects
found in the mounds in the vicinity, some of which show strong Spanish
influence, it was occupied up to and beyond the conquest.

[Illustration: PLATE 7
               SKETCH MAP OF BRITISH HONDURAS, WITH ADJACENT PARTS OF
               YUCATAN AND GUATEMALA, INDICATING THE POSITIONS OF
               MOUNDS EXCAVATED]




DESCRIPTION OF MOUNDS


MOUND NO. 1

Mound No. 1 (No. 24 on the plan of Santa Rita (fig. 14), situated midway
between Nos. 6 and 22) was conical in shape, nearly circular at the
base, 18 feet high, and 90 feet in circumference. It was built
throughout of large irregular blocks of limestone, the interstices being
filled with limestone dust and earth, forming together a sort of friable
mortar, which rendered the whole structure nearly as compact as a solid
block of masonry.

  [Illustration: FIG. 14. Plan of Santa Rita mounds.]

Excavation near the center of the mound, at a depth of 2 feet below the
surface, brought to light a large circular disk of roughly hewn
limestone, 3 feet in diameter by 8 inches thick. On lifting this it was
found to cover the mouth of a bell-like cist, nearly 3 feet in diameter
and about 5 feet in depth. On opening the cist, which was slightly
narrower at the bottom than at the top, it was found to be nearly half
filled with very fine brown dust, at the bottom of which lay a roughly
made circular urn 18 inches in diameter, covered by a mushroom-shaped
lid.

The urn was filled to the top with small crudely executed pottery
figurines of men and animals. There were 49 of these in all, consisting
of 4 warriors, with shield and spear, 3 seated human figures, 4 standing
figures (eating and fanning themselves), 4 lizards, 4 alligators, 4
snakes, 4 birds, 4 dragon-like creatures, 4 tigers, and 14 quashes or
picotes. The warriors (pl. 8) are represented in a crouching position,
with the right knee and left foot upon the ground; each holds in the
right hand a small spear and on the left forearm a circular shield.[25]
Two of them exhibit tusk-like objects projecting from their mouths. The
figures are 4-1/2 inches high; they are painted in red and white
throughout. The headdress consists of a boat-shaped cap worn with the
bow and stern projecting over the ears. The seated figures (pl. 9; fig.
15) are each 6 inches in height; these are painted throughout in red,
white, and green. Each is seated upon a low four-legged stool, and
grasps in one hand by its greatly enlarged spatulate glans the
projecting penis, on which he is seemingly performing some sort of
surgical operation with a long knife held in the other hand.

  [Illustration: FIG. 15.--Figurine from Mound No. 1.]

The headdress consists of a mitre-like erection in front, with a long
queue hanging down to the waist behind. Button-like labrets are worn on
each side of the mouth in two of the figures, and all wear large
circular ear plugs. The standing figures (fig. 16) are each 5-1/2 inches
high, and had been painted throughout in red and white, though not much
of the original color now remains. The headdress consists of a broad
flat cap decorated in front with a row of circular beads, and on each
side with a large tassel, which hangs down over the ear plugs. Each
figure wears a small narrow _maxtli_ and button-like labrets at each
angle of the mouth. In one of the figures the right hand is extended,
while the left holds a circular fan. In the other the forearms are
flexed at right angles, with hands held open in front of the waist, as
if about to receive something. The lizard effigies, though crudely made,
are most lifelike representations about 6 inches in length. The
alligators resemble very closely those taken from another mound at Santa
Rita.[26]

  [Illustration: PLATE 8
                 FIGURINES OF WARRIORS FROM MOUND NO. 1]

  [Illustration: PLATE 9
                 FIGURINES FROM MOUND NO. 1]

  [Illustration: FIG. 16. Figurines from Mound No. 1.]

The tigers and dragon-like creatures are exactly similar to those
figured in Nos. 6 and 4 of the same plate. The bird and snake effigies
are very crude and ill made; the former, about 1-1/2 inches in length,
represent birds in the act of flying, with wings extended. The snakes,
each represented with a double curve in the body, are about 5-1/2
inches in length and one-half inch in diameter; they are made of rough
clay, painted red. The effigies of the quashes, though rough and
crudely made, are rather vigorous and lifelike in execution. Each is
about 3 inches long. This small arboreal animal, which abounds in the
district, is represented in a variety of comical positions; so well
indeed has the artist studied his model that one can not help thinking
that he must have kept some of the little animals as pets, as many of
the Maya Indians do at the present day. The figures when first found
were so brittle that it was impossible to remove them from the pot
without breakage, as they had been seemingly only sun dried. After
exposure to the sun and air, however, for a few days they gradually
hardened.

The only unpainted object found in the urn was a natural-size model of
the human penis, in a state of semierection (fig. 17). This differed
from all the other objects in that it had been fired, instead of merely
sun dried, and is on that account much harder. Upon the upper surface
of the glans penis are three longitudinal incisions, extending almost
from base to apex, evidently made with a sharp-pointed implement while
the clay was still soft.

With these figurines a number of perforated beads of jade and some of
a dark-red stone, all nicely polished, were found; also the tooth of a
large alligator, perforated at the base, evidently for suspension with
the beads.

  [Illustration: FIG. 17.--Unpainted object from Mound No. 1.]

About 6 feet to the north of the center of the mound, at a depth of 3
feet below the surface, was discovered a small stone cist or chamber,
18 inches square, built of roughly cut blocks of limestone. Within
this were found most of the bones of a male of medium height and fair
muscular development. These bones were exceedingly friable, but showed
no effects of fire; with the exception of the tibiæ, they were in
no way abnormal. The upper articular surface of the right tibia had
disappeared. The shaft was rounded in section, the prominent angles
at the front and sides being obliterated. It was slightly bowed, with
the convexity anteriorly, and was considerably enlarged, especially
in its upper two-thirds, which were composed chiefly of very friable
cancellous tissue, rendering the bone much lighter than its appearance
indicated. The surface of the upper part of the bone was marked by the
presence of a number of small pits or depressions. Of the left tibia
only a few fragments were found, but so far as could be judged from
these a change somewhat similar to that observed in the right tibia
had taken place in it. The bones and other objects found in this mound
would suggest at first sight the possibility of the individual buried
beneath it having suffered during life from some form of venereal
disease, closely allied to, if not identical with, syphilis. On reading
Landa's account[27] of two forms of ceremonial self-mutilation carried
out by the Yucatecan Maya at the time of the conquest there can be
little doubt, however, that the figurines shown in plate 9 and figure
15 are meant to represent individuals inflicting on themselves one
or other of these, but, owing to the crudeness of the workmanship,
it is difficult to determine which. In one the foreskin was pierced
and expanded in much the same way that the ears were treated when
sacrificing to the idols. In the other, a number of men, sitting in
a row in the temple, each pierced his glans penis from side to side,
and passing a long piece of cord through all the apertures, strung
themselves together in this way.


MOUND NO. 2

Mound No. 2 (No. 25 on the plan, fig. 14) was situated a short distance
to the south of Mound No. 19. It was circular at the base, conical in
shape, 6 feet high at its highest point, and 40 yards in circumference.
On the summit of the mound, partially buried in the earth, was found a
conch shell, much worn by the weather, with the tip cut smoothly off,
and still capable of being used as a trumpet. The surface layer of the
mound was composed of earth, in which were embedded a few limestone
blocks. Within this layer, which was 18 inches thick, near the center
of the mound and a few inches beneath the surface, was found a turtle,
hewn from a block of limestone, measuring 13 inches in length and 10
inches in breadth. The next layer was composed of ashes, charcoal,
and pieces of half-charred wood. This layer, which varied from 3 to
8 inches in thickness, extended evenly over the whole surface of the
mound, and within it were found 16 beads of jade, two small round
three-legged vases, and the fragments of two pottery images. The beads
were all perforated and finely polished; two of them represented human
faces, and one the head of some animal, probably an alligator. One
is unusually large, measuring 3-3/4 inches in length by 3/4 inch in
breadth.

The clay images are so fragmentary as not to be worth figuring, but
in construction, ornamentation, and size they appear to be almost
identical with those found in the mounds at Santa Rita, already
described.[28] One of the vases is 3-1/4 inches and the other 2-3/4
inches in height; both are ovate. All the objects taken from this layer
show traces of having been exposed to the action of fire. The beads
are all more or less cracked and blackened, and the pottery images and
vases are discolored. The next layer was composed of mortar, embedded
in which were numerous pieces of limestone; it varied in depth from
18 inches to 2 feet. The upper part of this layer, to a depth of 2 to
3 inches, was yellow and very hard, and seemingly had been fired; the
lower part was lighter in color and very friable. Within this layer,
toward the center of the mound, was found the alligator effigy shown
in figure 18. This animal is 15-1/2 inches in length from the snout
to the tip of the tail. The interior is hollow, and in the center of
the dorsal region is a circular opening 3-1/2 inches in diameter,
surrounded by a rim 1-1/2 inches high and covered by a saucer-like
lid. Within the widely opened jaws is seen a human face, having at
each corner of the mouth a small pottery disk, and in the ears two
large circular ear plugs.[29] Between the eyes of the alligator are
two claw-like horns, 1 inch in length, each terminating in three
curved prongs, which point forward. Within the body were found two
small perforated beads of polished jade. The inside of the jaws is
colored red; the whole of the body, together with the head and limbs,
is colored brown; the forehead and cheeks of the face held between the
animal's jaws are colored blue; the nose, mouth, and chin, white.

  [Illustration: FIG. 18.--Clay alligator found in Mound No. 2.]

This is by far the largest and most carefully modeled of the pottery
figurines found at Santa Rita, the smallest detail having received
careful attention, and the scales, claws, and teeth being separately
and accurately formed.[30]

The fourth and deepest layer was 2-1/2 feet in thickness, and was
built of blocks of limestone, each weighing from 50 to 200 pounds,
roughly fitted together, without clay or mortar to fill in the
crevices. Scattered all through this layer were great numbers of
fragments of pottery censers decorated externally with human figures;
nearly 150 pounds of these were taken from it, representing probably
20 incense burners. The whole of the pottery when first found was
exceedingly brittle, but hardened in a few hours on being exposed
to the air and sun. At the bottom of this layer, and resting on the
ground, were found a number of pieces of black porous material with a
peculiar odor. The bottom of a large round pot, 10 inches in diameter,
was also found full of the same substance, which is probably a mixture
of copal gum with various aromatic substances, which had been used as
incense and partially charred at the bottom of the incense burner.
Fragments of the bottoms of round pots were found scattered about on
the ground level, many of them having bits of this charred incense
still adhering to them.

The mound appears to have been constructed in the following manner:
First, a number of pieces of burning incense and round jars containing
the same substance were strewn thickly over an area approximately 40
yards in circumference; next a foundation or platform 2-1/2 feet in
height was formed by placing together a number of large rough blocks of
limestone, among which were scattered the fragments of about 20 incense
burners, decorated outside with human figures in high relief. Over
this was plastered a layer of mortar 18 inches to 2 feet in thickness
in which was embedded the alligator seen in figure 18. Fires were
lighted on top of this mortar till its upper layers were discolored,
and into the fire while still burning were thrown fragments of two clay
images, two small oval vases, and a number of beads. Over the ashes and
charcoal left by the fires earth and blocks of limestone were heaped to
a height of 18 inches, and in this layer was buried the stone turtle
already referred to; finally on top of the earth layer was placed a
conch-shell trumpet.


MOUND NO. 3

Mound No. 3 (No. 26 on the plan, fig. 14) was situated immediately
between Mounds Nos. 6 and 11. It was roughly circular in shape, 120
feet in circumference and 3 feet in height. On being dug away to the
ground level it was found to be composed of earth and small blocks
of limestone, among which were numerous potsherds and fragments of
terra-cotta images, though the latter were so small that it was
impossible to tell how many images they represented. The potsherds
varied very much, some being rough and undecorated, others polished
and well painted in geometrical devices. Fragments of flint spearheads
and obsidian knives were also found in this mound. On reaching the
ground level the opening of a narrow passage 18 inches square was
discovered which led obliquely downward toward the east for a distance
of 8 feet; it was lined with roughly squared flags of limestone and
terminated in a small stone-lined chamber 2 feet square. On the floor,
half buried in fine dry earth, lay a small urn, roughly made of coarse
pottery, neither painted nor glazed. It was circular in form, 38-1/2
inches in circumference, with a semicircular handle at each side, and
was covered by a mushroom-shaped lid; with the lid in situ the whole
formed a somewhat irregular sphere. In the urn and almost completely
filling it were 20 small pottery figurines, comprising 3 warriors, 1
seated human figure, 4 alligators, 4 dragons, 6 quashes or picotes, and
2 serpent-like creatures.

The warrior figures resemble very closely those found in Mound No. 24
(see pl. 8), the only difference being that while two of them hold
shields on their left forearms, and grasp spears in their right hands
(as in pl. 8), the third warrior from this mound grasps a long dagger,
instead of a spear, in his right hand. The seated figure is very
similar to those from Mound No. 24 (see fig. 15), the only difference
being that the glans penis is grasped in the left hand while the right
hand wields the knife. The alligators are closely similar to those
already described, except that they are solid throughout instead of
being hollow. They are painted red, white, and black, and vary in
length from 5-1/2 to 6-1/2 inches. The tigers are similar to those
found in Mound No. 24, but are rougher, and not so carefully modeled;
all are hollow and are painted red throughout. The four dragon-like
creatures vary from 6 to 7 inches in length; the body, which is round
and slender, ends in a flattened bifid tail; the mouth, which is held
wide open, is furnished with a set of formidable teeth. Upon the upper
lip is a horn-like excrescence, and over the thorax are one dorsal and
two lateral fins. Each animal is painted white over the whole surface;
the inside of the mouth is painted red over the white layer. The six
quashes are exactly similar to those found in Mound No. 24, as are also
the two serpents.

Mounds containing animal and human effigies appear to be singularly
limited in their distribution. At Santa Rita seven have been explored
in all, each containing 1 to 49 effigies, some very crudely and
roughly made from sun-dried clay, others nicely modeled and painted
in various colors. Probably several more of these mounds had been
removed by the former owners of the estate to obtain stone for building
and road-making purposes, as figurines similar to those taken from
the excavated mounds were found in the possession of coolie laborers
working on the estate, which they said they had found from time to
time when digging for stone. The effigies comprise figures of men,
alligators, turtles, quashes, lizards, birds, sharks, and snakes,
together with two-headed dragons and other mythologic animals. Similar
mounds containing animal effigies have been found at Douglas, about
18 miles southwest of Santa Rita; at Bacalar, 25 miles northwest; at
Corozal, less than a mile south; and near San Antonio, about 9 miles
north of it. In each of these localities only a single effigy was
found, the workmanship of which resembled so closely that of the Santa
Rita specimens that it would be difficult to decide from which locality
they had come.

So far as it has been possible to ascertain, no similar human and
animal effigies have been previously discovered in this section of the
Maya area. The significance of these figurines appears to be somewhat
obscure. They are not invariably found associated with human remains,
though this may be owing to the fact that the bones have completely
perished through decay or because cremation has been practiced. They
show no signs of use or wear and were evidently made only to be buried.
The hollow specimens frequently contain one or more beads of red shell,
greenstone, or clay in their interiors, while in most cases they have
been found associated with fragments of pottery incense burners, which
in this region seem to have been very commonly mortuary in use. On
the whole it seems probable that these figurines were merely votive
offerings to the gods, buried with the dead. Some of them may indicate
the occupation of the individual with whom they were buried. A priest
and warrior from the same mound have been described, whose occupant may
have combined the double office, while a small statuette of an old man,
with a macapal slung over his shoulders, by a strap passing across the
forehead (typical of an Indian laborer of the present day), was found
by a coolie digging out stone from a mound at Santa Rita many years ago.


MOUND NO. 4

Mound No. 4 (No. 7 on the plan of the Santa Rita mounds)[31] has
recently been excavated, together with nearly the whole of the
earthwork on its south side. The mound was circular at the base,
conical in shape, 57 feet in height, 471 feet in circumference, and was
built of blocks of limestone held together by mortar. On the south side
of the mound and continuous with it was a circular earthwork 100 yards
in diameter. The walls inclosing the circular space varied from 10 to
25 feet in height. They were higher toward the north, where they were
continuous with the large mound, and lower toward the south, where an
opening 30 feet wide gave access to the inclosure. The summit of the
mound was truncated, circular, and about 20 feet in diameter.

  [Illustration: FIG. 19.--Objects from Mound No. 4.]

It was covered by a layer of alluvial earth 4 inches in thickness, on
removing which the following objects were brought to light, lying on the
layer immediately subjacent, near the center of the mound: (a) A
leaf-shaped spearhead of very light yellow flint, 5 inches in length;
(b) a leaf-shaped spearhead of reddish flint, 5-1/2 inches in length;
(c) an eccentrically-shaped flint object (fig. 19, _a_), 4-1/4 inches in
breadth by 2-3/4 inches in depth, of light grayish flint, very neatly
and carefully chipped; (d) a large, well-made flint arrowhead, deeply
grooved on each side of the base, 2-1/2 inches in length, and of light
grayish color (fig. 19, _b_); (e) the broken end of a roughly chipped
flint hook or crescent (fig. 19, _c_). With these flint objects were
found a small red-stone bead and a quantity of pieces of broken images,
as arms, legs, faces, hands, breastplates, etc., in rough pottery. Below
the alluvial layer the mound was composed of large blocks of limestone,
held together by mortar, giving it the consistency of masonry and
rendering digging in it very difficult. At a depth of 6 feet a small
oblong chamber was opened, built of rough blocks of limestone, about 8
feet by 3 feet, within which were found fragments of human bones, the
head pointing to the north. At both head and feet a few very roughly
chipped spearheads were found. At a depth of 10 feet another small
chamber, 4 feet in length by 2 feet in height and 2 feet in breadth, was
opened, also composed of rough blocks of limestone. Within this were
four basin-shaped vessels; two, somewhat larger than their fellows, were
superimposed upon them (fig. 20). These basins were made of rough
pottery, colored yellow, with a broad red stripe round the rim. Each was
pierced by a pair of small round holes, 1 inch apart, repeated at equal
intervals four times round the circumference, about one-half inch from
the margin. The perforations in the upper vase corresponded exactly to
those in the lower when they were discovered, suggesting that they had
been connected by cords of henequen fiber, _ti-ti_, or some perishable
material which had disintegrated. It was considered certain that these
vessels would contain a number of the small pottery figures which
similar vessels from neighboring mounds had yielded. On removing the
cover from the first one, however, it was found to contain nothing but
a small quantity of impalpable dust. The second contained about an equal
quantity of similar dust, together with a small rough opal. The
excavation of this mound was continued to a depth of about 18 feet, but
nothing further was discovered.

The circular space inclosed within the earthwork was surfaced by a layer
varying from 2 feet to 3 feet in thickness, resting on the bedrock, and
composed of rubble and powdered marl beaten into a compact mass, covered
by two layers of cement, one beneath the other, which formed a smooth
level floor over the whole inclosure. A great part of the earthwork and
the rubble from the floor of the inclosed space have been removed to
repair the Corozal streets. Nothing, however, was found within them with
the exception of a few broken flint axheads and spearheads, some
hammerstones (which are found practically everywhere), fragments of
obsidian knives, and quantities of potsherds. Plate 10 shows a section
through the earthwork in process of removal at its western extremity.

  [Illustration: FIG. 20.--Pottery vessels from Mound No. 4.]

The wall is 21 feet 8 inches in height at this point, though only about
17 or 18 feet are shown in the photograph, as the ground was filled
up behind the men excavating by a heap of limestone dust 3 or 4 feet
high, left after the stones had been removed. The wall is composed
here from the ground up of--(1) a layer of small rubble, 18 inches
in thickness, the stones composing which had apparently been picked
off the land; (2) a layer of cement, 6 to 8 inches in thickness (the
upper surface of this layer is continuous with the upper surface of
the cement covering the inclosed space, and the two together evidently
formed originally one continuous flat, smooth pavement); (3) a layer of
large rough blocks of limestone, 8 feet in thickness, built in together
with some care, but without the intervention of mortar (these blocks
had evidently been quarried out especially for this purpose, as they
were quite fresh and showed no signs of weathering); (4) a cement layer
3 feet in thickness, composed of alternate thin layers of bluish gray
cement and thick layers of yellowish cement, which can be faintly seen
in the photograph. At the point B, plate 10, were found a quantity
of ashes and small pieces of charred wood; the large stones in the
neighborhood were also blackened by the action of fire, and ashes were
mixed with the lower part of the cement layer, which would seemingly
indicate that a large fire, lasting a considerable period, had been
kept up at this point on top of layer c before the cement capping was
added. The top layer, 8 feet high, is composed of loose, friable mortar
with rough blocks of limestone set in it irregularly and finished
with a conical cap. In the upper center of plate 10, _b_, may be
distinguished a trench, 3 feet in width, which runs through the whole
thickness of this layer. Its walls are composed of rough limestone
blocks mortared together. The trench was completely filled in with
small loose rubble similar to that found in layer _a_.

The high, steep, solidly constructed mounds, the bases of many of which
are connected with more or less circular earthworks, were probably
lookouts or observation mounds. Most of these mounds terminate in a
narrow flattened summit too small to have supported even the smallest
temple, while many of them form the centers or nuclei of other groups
of mounds. Few contain anything besides the stone, mortar, and earth
of which they are constructed, though some of them contain superficial
interments. That at Santa Rita is exceptional in that it includes
stone-faced cysts. These mounds extend in a more or less regular chain
along the coast of Quintana Roo and British Honduras, reaching from
the top of Chetumal Bay nearly as far south as Northern River, and
extending inland in a southwesterly direction along the courses of the
Rio Hondo and Rio Nuevo, though many are situated at a considerable
distance from either sea or rivers.


MOUND NO. 5

Mound No. 5 (No. 27 on the plan, fig. 14), situated about 200 yards to
the southeast of the fortification, was 3 feet in height, 30 feet in
diameter, and nearly circular. It was built of blocks of limestone,
rubble, limestone dust, and earth. Many of these blocks had evidently
been taken from some building, as they were well squared. About the
center of the mound, at the ground level, a small cyst was discovered, 3
feet long, 2 feet broad, and 1 foot high, built throughout of rough
flags of limestone. Within it were two vases; one, shown in figure 21,
_a_, is of rough unpainted pottery, 4-1/2 inches high, with a small
ear-like projection on each side, each of which is ornamented with an
ear plug. Vases with these ear-like projections and ear plugs are not
uncommon in this area, and are probably highly conventionalized incense
burners. The figure of the god outside (which, as will be shown later
on, was represented after a time by the face only) has here had every
feature and ornament of the face eliminated with the exception of the
ears and ear plugs, which would always be unmistakable.

  [Illustration: PLATE 10
                 a. SECTION THROUGH EARTHWORK INCLOSING CIRCULAR SPACE.
                    SANTA RITA
                 b. SECTION OF WALL THROUGH SANTA RITA.]

  [Illustration: PLATE 11
                 EGG-SHAPED VASE FROM MOUND NO. 5]

The other, seen in plate 11, is an egg-shaped vase standing on three
short legs. It is decorated outside with a human face and was originally
painted white throughout and ornamented with black lines. It has a small
opening at the top covered by a triangular stopper. Within this vase
were found two small polished beads, one of greenstone, the other of red
shell. Throughout the mound were found numerous fragments of incense
burners, with the small head of a tiger, 2 birds, 5 small beads, 2
malachates, 4 net sinkers, and the ceremonial bar shown in figure 21,
_c_; all in rough pottery. About 5 feet from the northern edge of the
mound were found human bones, representing a single interment, seemingly
of a male of middle age. The skull and long bones, which were very
brittle, though they hardened on being exposed to the air for a day,
were gotten out only in fragments. The molar and premolar teeth are
heavily coated with tartar but are not greatly worn down at the crown;
the incisors, on the other hand, are very much worn and in life must
have been nearly level with the gum. Marked attrition of the incisors
seems to be present in nearly all the teeth of individuals past middle
life found in sepulchral mounds throughout this area, which is rather
remarkable, as the staple diet of the ancient inhabitants must have been
nearly identical with that of the Indians of the present day; that is,
maize ground to a fine paste on a stone metate, which of necessity
contains a good deal of grit from the metate, so much so that the modern
Maya say that an old man eats two rubbing stones and six rubbers during
his life. This gritty _nistamal_ wears down the back teeth of the modern
Maya almost to the gum, but does not materially affect the front teeth;
yet it is the latter, not the former, which we find affected in maxillæ
from the mounds. One of the molar teeth from this burial has had a
triangular piece removed from its crown (fig 21, _f_). Along one edge of
the gap left the tooth is carious.

  [Illustration: FIG. 21.--Objects found in Mound No. 5.]

Mingled with the human bones were found: (a) A flat, oblong object, made
of finely polished bone, 1 inch broad and one-tenth inch thick. Its
original length could not be determined, as the upper part had been
broken away. (b) Three beads, one of polished greenstone, two of
polished red shell; one of the latter was 1-1/3 inches long, with two
incomplete perforations passing through it longitudinally. It had
probably been intended to form part of a wristlet. (c) Parts of three
small obsidian knives which had evidently seen considerable use, as
their edges were much chipped. (d) The curious object shown in figure
21, _d_, front view, and _e_, side view. It is made of copper, and was
evidently used as tweezers, either for the removal of hair, for which
purpose it would be admirably adapted, as the lower expanded parts of
the blades when pressed together come into such close apposition that
the smallest and most delicate hair can be removed by means of them;[32]
or for the extraction of small thorns from the skin. Landa mentions the
fact that the Maya were in the habit of removing the hairs from their
chins and lips, but if this little implement was the only one employed
for the purpose the custom can not have been a very common one in this
locality, as no other similar specimen was found in any of the mounds.
Passing from north to south through the mound, about 8 feet from its
center, were two parallel rows of limestone flags, set perpendicularly,
about 18 inches apart. Against the outer of these rows lay a
considerable accumulation of animal bones, probably those of the tapir.
In the space between the outer row of flags and the edge of the mound
were found 10 oblong blocks of limestone, averaging 18 by 10 inches, the
upper surfaces of which were hollowed out to a depth of 3 or 4 inches.
These were probably intended as water receptacles for the use of fowls
or small animals kept about the home, as precisely similar small stone
troughs are made and used by the modern Indians for this purpose. The
space between the rows of flags was floored with mortar, but nothing was
found within it.


MOUND NO. 5 A

Mound No. 5 A (No. 28 on the plan, fig. 14) was situated within a few
yards of the opening into the circular earthwork attached to Mound No.
7. It was long and narrow, nowhere exceeding 2 feet in height. It was
built throughout of small limestone bowlders, mixed with a large
proportion of black earth. The limits of the mound were difficult to
define, as the earth of which it was built had been washed down and
mingled with the surrounding soil to so great an extent that it was
almost impossible to determine where one began and the other ended.

This mound or ridge has not as yet been completely explored, but in the
part which has already been dug down two interments were found. The
first was quite superficial, about 1 foot below the surface, near the
eastern extremity of the ridge. The bones were those of a well-developed
male, of rather unusual height and muscular development for a Maya
Indian; they were in an exceptionally good state of preservation, though
not protected from the surrounding earth by cist or burial chamber.
Unfortunately, the skull was smashed into small fragments by a careless
blow of the pickax before it was realized that a burial existed at the
spot. The body appeared to have been buried lying upon the right side,
with the legs flexed at the knees and thighs. From one of the incisor
teeth a quadrangular piece had been cleanly removed (fig. 21, _g_).
Unfortunately, the tooth in contact with it on the other side could not
be found, so that it was impossible to ascertain whether a corresponding
piece had been removed from this also. The tooth was much worn at the
cutting edge. Landa describes a grinding down of the teeth to a sawlike
edge, for ornamental purposes, practiced by the Yucatecans at the time
of the conquest,[33] and it seems probable that this tooth was operated
on for a similar purpose.

With the bones were found: (a) An oblong piece of marble-like stone, 2
inches long, 1-1/2 inches broad, and 1 inch deep, polished on all its
surfaces, probably used for smoothing or burnishing; (b) what appeared
to be a piece broken from a rubbing stone which had been squared, and
which showed marks on its upper surface indicating that it had been used
for giving an edge to stone implements; (c) fragments of rough unpainted
pottery.

The second interment was that of a child 8 to 10 years of age. The site
of this burial was within a few feet of the first, at a depth of about a
foot below the surface. The bones, which were in a fair state of
preservation, were in contact with the earth of which the mound was
built. The corpse appeared to have been laid on the side, with the legs
drawn up. With the bones were found only a few ornaments broken from
pottery incense burners, as ear plugs, small animal heads, and part of a
quilted breastplate.

This mound was probably of a much later date than the other mounds
described at Santa Rita. It is merely an irregular ridge built of earth
and stones, while the earlier mounds just referred to are well defined
and constructed of blocks of limestone with rubble, limestone dust, and
mortar filling in the interstices. The bones, though placed under the
most unfavorable conditions, having been in direct contact with the damp
earth, are in an excellent state of preservation, far better, indeed,
than even the best preserved of those in the other mounds where the
conditions are decidedly more favorable. The skeletons of children are
practically never found in the other mounds, as the bones have long
since disappeared completely, while here we find the bones of a child
under 12 years of age in a fairly good state of preservation. There are
a number of those sepulchral ridges at Santa Rita, many of them hardly
distinguishable from the surrounding soil; they are all seemingly of
much more recent date than the other mounds, and are probably the work
of Maya Indian tribes who flourished long after the conquest.

  [Illustration: FIG. 22.--Diagram of Mound No. 6.]


MOUND NO. 6

Mound No. 6 was situated near the southwestern boundary of Santa Rita.
The mound was nearly circular, with flattened top, 25 yards in diameter,
and 10 feet high at its highest point. Toward the southern side of the
mound was unearthed a wall (fig. 22, A) 2 feet thick, 2 feet high, and
about 15 yards long. From the ends of the wall roughly made masses of
limestone and mortar (fig. 22, BB) passed almost through the mound,
inclosing a rectangular space, C. The wall was evidently the remains of
an older structure, as it was built of well-squared stones and had been
broken down at both the top and sides. The masses of masonry (fig. 22,
BB) were 5 to 6 feet thick by about 5 feet high. The space C was filled
with alternating layers of mortar and small rubble. The spaces (fig. 22,
FFF) at the periphery of the mound were filled with rubble mixed with
earth.

  [Illustration: PLATE 12
                 METATES AND BRAZOS FROM MOUND NO. 6]

  [Illustration: PLATE 13
                 a. SMALL POTTERY SEAL
                 b. BOWL IN WHICH SKULL WAS FOUND
                 c. SKULL
                    Length, 15.9 cm.; breadth, 15.9 cm.;
                    height, 13.3 cm.; circumference, 47.9 cm.]

The rubble, wherever found in the mound, contained large quantities of
potsherds, together with flint chips and a few hammerstones. In the
spaces FFF were found numerous fragments of metates and brazos, with one
unbroken specimen of each (pl. 12). At the points marked (fig. 22, 1, 2,
3, 4) four human interments were encountered at a depth of 12 to 18
inches beneath the surface. The bodies had been buried lying on the
back, fully extended. The bones were in a very poor state of
preservation, and with each interment were found a few flint chips,
hammerstones, broken spearheads, obsidian knives, and one or two small,
very roughly made, round cooking pots. The whole mound was removed to
provide material for the Corozal streets. On reaching the ground level
it was found that a series of trenches had been cut through the earth
beneath, to the bedrock, and filled in with small rubble. Figure 23
gives a plan of these trenches, which are in the form of two
parallelograms, measuring 9 yards by 6 yards, joined by a third of
approximately the same area. The trenches varied from 3 to 4 feet in
breadth and from 1-1/2 to 3-1/2 feet in depth, according to the
thickness of the layer of earth over the bedrock. The space marked
figure 23, A, contained remains of at least 30 interments; some of these
were in small semicircular excavations made in the surrounding earth
from the sides of the trenches; these are shown at figure 23, D; others
were made in holes dug in the earth at various points within the space
A. The bodies buried in the excavations at the sides of the trenches
seem to have been crowded in, in a variety of positions, in order to
accommodate themselves to the size and shape of the cavity. Most of
those in the space A had been buried head downward, the skulls resting
in some cases in earthenware bowls, with the back bent, legs flexed, and
knees drawn up against the chin. Nearly all these bones were decayed and
friable, and could not be removed without crumbling away. The only
exception was the burial marked figure 23, D´, from which the upper part
of the skull was recovered almost entire, though the facial bones and
lower jaw were lost. This skull (pl. 13, _c_) rested in the bowl shown
in plate 13, _b_, a handsome piece of pottery, standing upon four nearly
globular hollow legs, with slits in their sides, and within them small
spheres of clay which rattled when the bowl was moved. It is painted
yellow and red throughout, and is nicely polished. A great number of
objects were found accompanying the bones in the space A. These included
flint ax heads and spearheads, flint scrapers, and hammerstones, two
obsidian spearheads, and fragments of obsidian knives, shell and clay
beads, and a small cylindrical pottery seal about 3 inches in length,
with a geometrical device in low relief stamped upon it (pl. 13, _a_).
The bones of the peccary, curassow, snake, and of some variety of fish
were also found, together with the shells of conches, cockles, snails,
and hooties (a large variety of freshwater snail still eaten by the
natives). A block of crystalline limestone, 18 inches long by 8 inches
high and 12 inches broad, was found in one of the semicircular pits
leading from the trench at the upper border of space A, figure 23. It
was traversed by 14 longitudinal grooves on its upper surface, which was
slightly concave; each groove was 1/2 inch broad by 1/4 inch deep, quite
smooth, and nearly straight. The stone had seemingly been used as a hone
for giving an edge to small stone implements.

  [Illustration: FIG. 23.--Diagram of trenches in Mound No. 6.]

Extending out toward the northeast from the main mound was a low
structure (fig. 22, G) 4 feet in height and 25 yards in length. It was
composed throughout of layers of clay, rubble, and limestone dust, not
very clearly separated. Three separate interments were found beneath
this mound near its center (fig. 22, H), the bones in all of which were
very much decayed. From the first of these the shallow bowl (fig. 24,
_a_), 7-1/2 inches in diameter by 1-1/2 inches deep, together with the
vase _d_, 8 inches in height, were taken. The vase was of rather fine
pottery, painted a uniform dark red throughout. Nothing else was found
with this interment.

From the second grave were taken a bowl exactly similar to that shown in
figure 24, _a_, two flat dishes 12 inches in diameter (fig. 24, _e_),
and a small polished bone ring 1 inch in length, seemingly a section
from one of the larger long bones of some large animal. The vessel _g_,
6 inches in diameter, was also found with this burial; it is made of
fine pottery, painted red, and possesses a curious upturned spout, which
bends inward toward the rim of the pot to such an extent that it would
be impossible either to drink or pour out the contents therefrom. These
curious pots, usually with the spout parallel to the perpendicular axis
of the vessel, are quite common among Maya pottery from this district;
they were supposed to have been used as chocolate pots, but drinking
from them must have been a feat of legerdemain.

  [Illustration: FIG. 24.--Bowls, vases, and dishes found in Mound
                           No. 6.]

From the third grave came two bowls, both almost spherical, the one 12
inches, the other 6 inches, in diameter (fig. 24, _c_). At the point K,
near the end of the mound G (fig. 22), three interments were found, very
close together, on the ground level; these had evidently been contained
at one time in a small oval cist, built of rough blocks of limestone,
which had now completely caved in. With the bones were found the vases
shown in figure 24, _b_, _f_, _h_, of the same red-painted pottery as
was found elsewhere in the mound. Six well-made bone awls, or lance
heads, each about 6 inches in length, together with a heap of the
shells of some large bivalve, one of which was polished and perforated
for use as an ornament, were also found among these bones. The stones of
which the cist had been built, the bones, and the objects accompanying
them were so inextricably mixed that it was impossible to tell which
objects belonged to each set of bones. Passing through the long axis of
this mound was a rubble-filled trench, 3 feet in breadth, dug down to
the bedrock, exactly similar in structure to those already described. No
interments were found at the sides of this trench, which is shown in
figure 23, E.

  [Illustration: Flag of limestone shown in D, fig. 25.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 25.--_A_, skull; _B_, limestone formation;
                           _C_, excavation; _D_, grooved flag in situ;
                           _E_, projecting lip.]


MOUND NO. 6 A

Mound No. 6 A, another of the group of mounds adjoining the
southwesterly boundary of Santa Rita, measured 18 feet by 15 feet at the
base, by about 3 feet high at the highest point, and was built
throughout of earth, large blocks of limestone, and limestone dust. The
mound rested directly on the limestone formation. Into this, near the
center of the mound, an oval excavation had been made (see C C, fig. 25)
about 10 inches in depth, and in size just large enough to contain the
skull which was found within it. A ledgelike projection was left at one
edge of the excavation (see E, fig. 25), and just beneath this rested
the point of the jaw. A large heavy flag of limestone (see D, fig. 25),
from which a semicircular segment had been chipped, was placed above the
excavation opposite the lip, so that the groove in the stone inclosed
the neck and clamped the skull tightly down in the little hole which
had been made to receive it. On each side of the skull the femora were
found, in a nearly vertical position, condyles downward, and between the
femora many fragments of other bones were brought to light, including
the tibiæ, arm bones, and vertebræ. Resting upon the limestone flag
which covered the skull lay a large, rudely made chert hammerstone, 8
inches long by 4 inches broad, which had probably been used in chipping
out the semicircular groove to fit the neck. Near the center of this
mound, 2 feet below the surface, two very neatly made flint hammerstones
were found. The dimensions of this skull were: Length, 14.22 cm.;
breadth, 16.76 cm.; circumference, 48.26 cm.; cephalic index, 123. The
base of the skull was so much damaged that the height could not be
ascertained. The extreme breadth in comparison with the length, giving
it a remarkably brachicephalic appearance, was possibly, to some extent
at least, the result of post-mortem compression from before backward
within the little cavity which contained it.


MOUND NO. 7

Mound No. 7, situated very close to No. 6 A, was oval in shape,
measuring 30 yards by 10 yards at the base, and 8 feet high along the
summit. It was built throughout of large blocks of limestone, limestone
dust, and a small proportion of earth. It rested upon the natural
limestone formation, into which, near the western end of the mound, a
shallow oval pit 18 inches in length by 10 inches in depth had been dug.
In this was found a somewhat imperfect skull, resting with the foramen
magnum uppermost. The other bones, which were distributed irregularly
around the hole, were in a poor state of preservation. Upon one side of
the skull lay a small shallow bowl, with four hollow legs, each
containing a pellet of dry clay loose in its interior; and upon the
other side a small three-legged vase. Both of these were of rather crude
pottery, painted dark-red throughout and polished. Two other excavations
similar to this were found in the limestone beneath this mound, each
containing fragments of a skull in a very advanced state of decay,
surrounded by fragments of the other bones. No additional pottery or
other objects were found beside them. The two mounds last described are
the only ones in which this peculiar method of interment appears to have
been employed. The procedure seems to have been somewhat as follows:
First, the earth capping was removed from the limestone rock, over the
area to be occupied by the mound; next, shallow oval pits were dug in
the rock into which the skulls were wedged; each body was bent, and the
thighs were flexed on the abdomen, so that the knees touched the rock on
each side of the head; finally, the mound was built up of limestone
dust, earth, and blocks of limestone around the body, in this position.


MOUND NO. 8

Mound No. 8, situated very close to Mound No. 7, was roughly circular,
36 feet in diameter and 4 feet high on its flattened top. It was built
throughout of earth, limestone dust, and blocks of limestone. Projecting
from the western edge of the mound was a large, roughly hewn block of
limestone, 3 feet by 4 feet, and 8 inches in thickness. Running through
the center of the mound from east to west were two parallel rows of
limestone flags, 2 feet apart, projecting 18 inches from the limestone
rock upon which the mound was erected and in which they were embedded.
Near the center of the mound, between the rows of limestone flags and
resting on the earth, covered only with limestone dust, was found a
single interment. The skull is shown in plate 14. Its dimensions are:
Length, 17.01 cm.; breadth, 16.51 cm.; height, 10.68 cm.; circumference,
51.30 cm.; cephalic index, 97. The body, which was stretched at full
length, had probably been laid face downward, as the bones of the
forearms, also shown in plate 14, were found beneath the skull. With the
bones of the hands were found four copper rings, considerably oxidized;
three were plain narrow bands, while the fourth was a broad flat band
decorated with incised double volutes. Some of the phalanges were
colored a bright-greenish tinge, from contact with the rings. Three of
the rings and three phalanges are shown in plate 14. These bones were
all in a remarkably good state of preservation, probably owing to the
fact that they were completely surrounded by fine limestone dust.

  [Illustration: FIG. 26.--Circular openings leading into natural
                           cavity.]

Within a few yards of this mound was the opening of a small _chultun_,
with steps leading to the interior. It was oval in shape, 15 feet long,
and at one time had been covered with plaster, which had nearly all
peeled off. The floor was covered with earth, of which there was a
pyramidal heap under the opening. Nothing was found in this _chultun_
except great quantities of fragments of large, rough earthenware water
vessels.

  [Illustration: PLATE 14
                 SKULL AND BONES FROM MOUND NO. 8]

About 300 yards to the east of the mound three circular openings were
found (see AAA, fig. 26) leading into a large irregular natural cavity
(see C, fig. 26) formed in the limestone (see BB, fig. 26). Each of
these openings was about 2 feet in diameter, and close to one of them
a circular slab of stone, 6 inches in thickness, and of about the same
diameter as the opening, was found, which had probably been used as
a cover for the latter. This _chultun_, unlike the first one, was of
purely natural formation; the walls, which were rough and irregular,
showed no signs of tool marks. The chamber varied in height from 8 to
9 feet beneath the openings, where it was highest, to 2 to 3 feet at
the sides. There was a considerable accumulation of earth upon the
floor (see DD, fig. 26), which had evidently fallen and been blown in,
as it was collected in two heaps beneath the openings. There were no
stone steps leading down into this _chultun_, and access must have been
gained to the interior by means of wooden ladders, which had long since
disappeared. Numbers of potsherds, shells, pieces of charcoal, clay
beads, and fragments of flint and obsidian implements were found upon
the floor. Several skeletons of small mammals were also found among the
earth, but these creatures had probably fallen in after the _chultun_
ceased to be used, and had been unable to get out.

At a distance of less than half a mile from the last-mentioned
_chultun_ another was discovered under somewhat curious circumstances.
A large flat mound was completely removed for the sake of the stone and
limestone dust which it contained, to be used in repairing the Corozal
streets. About the center of the mound, at the ground level, a heavy
circular flag of limestone, 2 feet 4 inches in diameter, was brought
to light. On removing this it was found to cover a round well-like
opening, which expanded below into a small _chultun_, 12 feet long by
9 feet in greatest diameter. The chamber was egg-shaped and showed no
signs of having ever been stucco-covered. From the opening a short
flight of steps, cut in the rock, led to the bottom of the _chultun_.
Nothing was found in this _chultun_ with the exception of two small
bowls of rather coarse earthenware, painted red and polished; one
almost globular in shape, 6 inches in diameter; the other circular,
flat-bottomed, 3-1/2 inches in height. The mound which covered this
_chultun_ appeared to have been one of the commonest kind of burial
mounds. At its summit fragments of a rude circular earthenware pot were
found, and near its center fragments of human bones, together with
three flint hammerstones and two small round vessels, one of light
yellow, the other of yellowish-red, pottery.

One of the most remarkable of the _chultuns_ found in this area is
situated at San Andres, within a mile of the village of Corozal.
It was accidentally found by some coolies in digging marl, and as,
unfortunately, the entire roof of the larger chamber and a considerable
part of that of the smaller had caved in, it was impossible to
discover how it had been entered from outside, as no trace of steps
remained. A ground plan of this _chultun_ is shown in figure 27. The
small chamber, A, is 8 feet long, 7 feet broad, and 5 feet 6 inches
high in the center; it is cut out of solid rock. The large chamber
(C) is 15 feet in diameter, but as nearly the entire roof has fallen
in, it is impossible to estimate its exact height. The chambers are
partially separated by a wall (B) built of rough blocks of stone and
tough mortar, which has been partly broken down. In the side of the
small chamber, opposite the wall, are three oblong shafts (D, D, D,
fig. 27) cut into the rock, by the side of the chamber wall, which is
here nearly perpendicular. Each of these is about 1 foot in depth by 8
to 9 inches in breadth, and is separated from the chamber by a single
row of bricks (E, E, E, fig. 27) mortared together, reaching from
the roof to the floor, so that there is no communication between the
shafts and the chamber. Each shaft opened originally on the surface of
the ground, but the openings had become blocked by vegetable refuse
from the surrounding bush. The bricks which fill in one side of each
shaft are of two kinds. The first, by far the more numerous, are made
of sun-dried clay, yellowish in color, and very friable: they contain
considerable powdered marl. They measure 8 by 4 by 2-3/4 inches. The
bricks of the second kind also are made of clay, mixed with many
pebbles; they have been fired, are of a reddish color, far harder and
tougher than the first variety; they measure 8 by 4 by 2-1/4 inches.
Nothing was found in either chamber except a few potsherds of various
kinds.

  [Illustration: FIG. 27.--Ground plan of chultun.]

These underground chambers, or _chultuns_, seem to be fairly common
throughout Yucatan. Considerable doubt exists as to the uses to which
they were put.[34] It seems probable that those the walls of which
were plastered with an impervious cement lining were intended as water
receptacles, since they could easily have been filled by drainage
from the thatched roofs of buildings in the vicinity, which have long
since completely disappeared. Though the southern part of Yucatan,
unlike the northern, is fairly well watered, plastered _chultuns_ are
not infrequently found there, but always situated at considerable
distances from a good permanent water supply, as a lagoon or river. The
uncemented _chultuns_ would not hold water, and had probably been used
as storehouses for corn and other provisions. Some of these chambers
were undoubtedly used as burial places, as one at Platon, on the Old
River,[35] was covered by a burial mound, and itself contained human
bones; but it is possible that their use for this purpose may have been
secondary only. The San Andres _chultun_ is somewhat puzzling, as it
was certainly not a reservoir for water, nor were any traces of human
burial found within it. It had probably been used as a storehouse for
food, though it is difficult to understand the object of the oblong
shafts, leading into the open air, found at the side of the smaller
chamber, as they must have been quite useless for ventilating purposes,
not having any opening into the chamber itself through which the air
might circulate.


MOUND NO. 9

Mound No. 9, situated close to the _chultun_, with three openings, was
oval in shape with flattened summit, 44 feet in breadth, 66 feet in
length, and 14 feet high at its highest point. On removing the summit
of the mound to a depth of about 4 feet the floor of a building, with
parts of the walls, was exposed. The cap of the mound, covering the
ruins of the building, was composed of blocks of marl, clay, rubble,
and limestone. The lower part of the mound, upon which the building
stood, was constructed of large blocks of limestone mortared together,
forming a solid block of masonry. The building was in a very ruinous
condition; as much of its ground plan as could be traced is shown in
figure 28. The walls, A, A, A, are 3 feet 4 inches in thickness.

Such parts as remain standing are built of well-squared stones held
together by mortar (see fig. 30). They are covered with stucco inside,
which is continuous with the cement flooring of the rooms; outside
they were also covered with stucco above the water table (B, figs. 28
and 29) but nearly all of this had been broken away. The water table,
which projects 3 inches from the wall, is 12 inches deep; it is built
of well-squared stones not covered with stucco, and is continuous below
(figs. 29 and 30) with C, a layer of hard cement 18 inches broad,
which apparently ran completely round the building, and possibly acted
as a drain to carry off the water after heavy tropical showers. The
main room was 8 feet in breadth and had probably been about 30 feet
in length, with four doors opening into it, two on each side. This
was floored with very hard, smooth, polished cement, which even now
is in an excellent state of preservation; this flooring is continuous
through the doorways with the top of the water table, with which it is
on the same level. Nothing was found in excavating this mound, with
the exception of a fragment of a conch-shell trumpet, a piece of an
obsidian knife, numerous potsherds, and half of a flint paint grinder,
with traces of green paint still adherent to it. All of these objects
were found on the floor of the main room.

  [Illustration: FIG. 28.--Ground plan of Mound No. 9.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 29.--Wall construction of Mound No. 9.]

Mounds erected over the ruins of buildings are extremely common all
through this part of the Maya area; some are very large, covering
buildings which had been placed on lofty stone pyramids; some are very
small, as when they cover buildings of a single small room, built
almost on the ground level. All the buildings are in ruins, all are
raised more or less on stone platforms above the ground level, and all
show traces of having been covered with stucco, both internally and
externally. In some cases this stucco is very beautifully decorated in
colored devices, as in the mound already described at Santa Rita;[36] in
others the stucco is molded in various designs and ornaments, which may
or may not be colored, as in the mound at Pueblo Nuevo on the Rio Nuevo,
presently to be described. Most of these mounds contain nothing except
the building which they cover, but some had been used as burial places,
the interments evidently having taken place after the building had been
covered in, as they are found irregularly distributed through the loose
superstructure which forms the cap of the mound, quite close to the
surface.[37]

  [Illustration: FIG. 30.--Details of Mound No. 9.]


MOUND NO. 10

Vague reports had been in circulation for some years as to the existence
of a mound close to the headwaters of the Rio Hondo, where the Indians
still practiced to some extent their ancient religion. It was said that
the mound contained a stone chamber in which stood on a stone pedestal a
life-sized image, painted in various colors, and that around the walls
of the chamber were niches in which rested life-sized stone turtles,
also painted; furthermore, that the bush Indians of the neighborhood
were in the habit of coming to the mound for the purpose of burning
incense before the idol.

The mound was found situated quite close to the bank of the Rio Hondo,
buried in the bush which covers this part of Yucatan. It was 80 feet in
height, 350 feet in circumference, conical in shape, and completely
covered by high bush continuous with that of the surrounding forest.
After clearing the underbrush from the mound an opening 3 feet square
was discovered about 17 feet from the summit of the mound on its
northern aspect, the walls of which were faced with cut stone. From this
opening a low passage led to a small stone-faced chamber 8 feet high, 6
feet broad, and 10 feet long, the floor of which was composed of earth
and lime well beaten down to form a hard, smooth surface. Projecting
from the walls were eight small stone brackets, upon which nothing was
found. No trace whatever was seen of a painted image or of turtles. The
walls and ceiling of the room, especially the latter, were considerably
blackened by smoke, possibly caused by burning incense.

  [Illustration: FIG. 31.--Obsidian object and pottery vase from Mound
                           No. 10.]

Excavation was commenced at once in the floor of the chamber. At a depth
of 8 inches the hard floor gave place to soft brown sand, which was
continuous to a depth of 2 feet, where several small deposits or pockets
of lime were found inclosed within it, each of which contained a number
of obsidian knives and small cores. The knives were deeply indented on
each side of the base, as if to facilitate hafting. The cores, of which
20 were found, were slender and varied from 1 to 3 inches in length. On
digging down through an additional 18 inches of the brown sand a layer
of lime was exposed about 18 inches in thickness, filling the entire
lumen of the chamber, in which were found irregularly scattered 60
cruciform objects, finely chipped in obsidian, each from 3 to 4 inches
in length (fig. 31, _a_). These would have served as either arrowheads
or small javelin heads, or possibly were intended for ceremonial
purposes only. With them were a single pottery vase and two small
triangular javelin heads of obsidian. The vase (fig. 31, _b_) was
circular in shape, 6 inches in diameter, with a long piglike face
protruding from one side. It was made of dark-brownish pottery, painted
red and finely polished externally. It was filled with small mussel-like
bivalve shells embedded in lime. A number of these shells were found
also closely adjacent to the vase in the lime which surrounded it.
Beneath the layer of lime lay a layer of brown sand, 3 feet thick, in
which absolutely nothing was found. Below this appeared another layer of
lime, mixed with sand, 4 feet thick, near the bottom of which were found
40 human skulls, neatly disposed in rows. These, when first uncovered,
seemed to be in a moderately good state of preservation, but when
removed from their bed of lime and sand they crumbled so easily that it
was found impossible to preserve them. The skulls were all placed in the
same horizontal plane, each one nearly in contact with its neighbor. No
other bones were found with them, or in fact in any other part of this
mound, with the exception of two small oblong objects of bone, about 2
inches in length, each still bearing traces of paint, which were
discovered among the skulls. These skulls would seem to have been either
the result of secondary interments or the remains of sacrificial victims
whose bodies were either eaten or buried elsewhere. In favor of the
first theory is the fact that the Maya did not practice human sacrifice
to anything like the same extent that their neighbors, the Aztecs, did,
and slaughter involving forty-odd victims must have been practically
unknown among them. Furthermore, in one or two instances small shallow
stone-lined graves, covered with large slabs of stone, have been found
at and around the bases of large mounds, and it seems quite possible
that these graves may have held the bodies of distinguished dead until
their skulls were in a fit condition to be removed to the mound or until
a sufficient number had accumulated to make it worth while opening the
chamber for their reception. In favor of the second theory is the fact
that, judging by what could be seen of the teeth and lower jaws, all the
skulls were of individuals in the prime of life, no jaws of very young
or of very old individuals being discovered. Immediately beneath the
skulls were unearthed 12 objects of chert fashioned with great care.
Seven of these were spearheads, the other five of eccentric form. The
spearheads varied in length from 37 cm. (pl. 15, _c_) to 29 cm. (pl. 15,
_f_); they were very well made, some from gray, others from
brownish-yellow, chert. The eccentric flints comprised: (a) An animal
form, possibly meant to represent a bush rabbit, 30 cm. in length from
the forehead to the tip of the tail (pl. 15, _a_); (b) an animal form,
evidently meant to represent a turtle or tortoise, 28 cm. in length from
the head to the tip of the tail (pl. 15, _g_); (c) a halberd-shaped
implement (pl. 15, _b_), exquisitely chipped from light-ocher-colored
chert, 44 cm. in its greatest length by 19 cm. in breadth across the
widest part of the head. This implement is furnished with two
sharp-pointed cutting projections in front, separated by a groove; at
the back is a larger triangular sharp projection. The whole implement is
well balanced, for use in the hand, by a bulging or thickening of its
body between these three projections; (d) an implement chipped from
yellowish chert, 44 cm. in length, serrated on each side, pointed at one
end and rounded at the other (pl. 15, _d_); (e) a crescentic implement,
chipped from yellowish chert, 26 cm. in its greatest length, 17-1/2 cm.
across the widest part of the crescent. From the convexity of the
crescent project three spines, the central one long and serrated, the
lateral ones merely pointed knobs. This object is more crudely chipped
and less symmetrical than any of the others (pl. 15, _e_).

These eccentrically shaped flint and chert objects seem to be limited in
their distribution to that part of the Maya area comprised in southern
Yucatan, eastern Guatemala, and most of the colony of British Honduras.
The earliest known specimens are probably those now preserved in the
Salisbury Museum, England, which have been thus described:

    Among the numerous stone weapons and implements which have been
    discovered, and serve to illustrate the primitive arts of the New
    World, three remarkable relics from the Bay of Honduras, in South
    America, are deserving of special attention. They were found about
    the year 1794, with other examples, in a cave between two and three
    miles inland. * * * One is a serrated weapon, pointed at both ends,
    measuring 16-1/2 inches long. [This object is almost exactly
    similar to plate 15, _d_, except that the latter is pointed at one
    end only, the opposite one being rounded.] Another is in the form
    of a crescent, with projecting points. It measures 17 inches in its
    greatest length, and it is conjectured may have served as a weapon
    of parade, like the state partisan or halbert of later times. The
    third, which is imperfect, has probably resembled the previous one
    in general form.[38]

The second of these implements very closely resembles that shown in
plate 15, _e_, the Salisbury specimen being somewhat larger, more
symmetrical, and more carefully chipped.

About 3 feet beneath these flint objects, embedded in the sand which
filled this part of the chamber, were discovered 20 cruciform obsidian
arrowheads or javelin heads, similar to that shown in figure 31, _a_;
40 small obsidian cores; 2 obsidian arrowheads, of the shape shown
in figure 32; 12 well-made obsidian knives, grooved on each side of
the base, and two crescentic objects chipped from chert, somewhat
resembling that seen in plate 15, _e_, but smaller, without projecting
spines at the convexity of the crescent, and altogether more crudely
and carelessly made.

  [Illustration: PLATE 15
                 STONE OBJECTS FROM MOUND NO. 10]

  [Illustration: FIG. 32.--Obsidian arrowhead from Mound No. 10.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 33.--Flint object from Mound No. 10.]

After the sand and lime had been removed from this chamber to a depth of
nearly 30 feet it was found that the walls became continuous with the
solid foundation of masonry upon which the mound stood. This was very
difficult to penetrate, and so far as was ascertained contained nothing
further of interest. The roof of the chamber was next attacked from the
summit of the mound. To a depth of nearly 2 feet nothing was found but
fine, brown alluvial soil, full of the roots of plants and trees.
Beneath this the real structure of the mound began, for not so much as a
solitary potsherd or chip of flint was found in the earth on the summit
of the mound, indicating clearly that this layer had accumulated since
its construction. Beneath the earth layer, to the roof of the chamber,
the mound was composed of blocks of limestone of varying size, loose
friable mortar, and powdered limestone. In the first 8 feet nothing
except a few potsherds was found. At this depth two shallow circular
saucers, each 7-1/2 cm. in diameter, were unearthed. These were made of
coarse red unpainted pottery, and close to them lay a finely chipped
flint object (fig. 33, _a_, _b_). This was rounded at both ends,
narrower at the handle than at the base, and markedly convex on its
under surface (fig. 33, _a_, _b_). The front part of the under surface
was quite smooth and polished, evidently from attrition, while that part
of it marked A A bore distinct traces of blue paint. There can be little
doubt that this implement was a paint grinder, as a specimen almost
exactly similar was found in a mound near Corozal, bearing traces of
green paint on the under surface. Fourteen nicely polished reddish stone
beads, spherical in shape, together with four smaller beads of a
light-green color, and a leaf-shaped spearhead of flint, were found
adjacent to the paint grinder. Immediately beneath these was found an
object made of what seems to be reddish-brown agate; this is 10 cm. in
length, oval in section, 1 cm. in its greatest breadth, tapering off to
a blunt point at each end, and finely polished all over. With it were
nearly 300 small triangular obsidian objects of the shape shown in
figure 34. These vary in length from 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 cm. They are thick
at the upper angle, the side subtending this forming a sharp cutting
edge. In some of the implements this edge is notched, as if from use.
These implements were probably used as scrapers, or small chisels or
gouges, for which purposes they would be suitable, either hafted or
unhafted. It is possible that they may have been used as teeth for the
sword known to the Aztec as _mextatl_, which was also in use among the
Maya at the time of the conquest. This weapon was constructed by setting
a number of sharp obsidian splinters in deep lateral grooves, cut in a
long piece of hard wood, which were filled with liquid resin, in order
to prevent the splinters from shifting from their positions.

  [Illustration: FIG. 34.--Obsidian object from Mound No. 10.]

In the Stann Creek district of British Honduras, on the banks of the
Sittec River, at a distance of approximately 15 miles from its mouth,
there exists an extensive clearing in the bush known as "Kendal Estate."
The soil here is remarkably fertile and well suited for the cultivation
of every kind of tropical vegetable product. As has been pointed out
before, wherever throughout northern Central America one finds patches
of exceptionally rich soil, there, on clearing the bush, will be found
in greater or less numbers the mounds erected by the former inhabitants,
together with the indestructible refuse usually associated with former
village sites, as fragments of pottery, flint and obsidian chips, broken
and rejected implements and weapons, shells of various edible shellfish,
clay beads, net sinkers, malacates, broken rubbing stones, etc. The
converse of this holds true to some extent, as one of the guides relied
on by the modern degenerate Maya Indian in his annual selection of land
for a milpa, or corn plantation, is the number of mounds which he finds
upon it. Indeed this remarkable index as to the degree of fertility of
the soil appears to be almost the only useful heritage transmitted to
him by his courageous and comparatively highly civilized ancestors.


MOUND NO. 11

Mound No. 11, at Kendal, occupies a conspicuous position upon the summit
of a small natural elevation, situated on the left bank of the river
close to its margin. It is 60 feet long, 40 feet broad, and 20 feet
high, its long diameter running due east and west. An excavation was
made into the north slope of the mound, which exposed a three-walled
chamber, 8 feet in length by 4 feet 8 inches in width. There was no wall
on the south side. The north wall, owing to the outer slope of the mound
trending over it, was only 1 foot in height; the east and west walls
were each 4 feet high. All three walls were about 18 inches thick. The
chamber was packed with water-worn boulders and earth, among which
nothing was found but scattered patches of charcoal, with a few small
red pots, so rotten and friable from long exposure to the damp that it
was found impossible to remove them. Had there ever been bones in the
chamber, as seems probable, they must have completely disintegrated long
before from contact with the damp clay. The floor was composed of flags
of shale. About the center of the west wall a recess was discovered 2
feet wide by 1-1/2 feet high. This was half filled with earth, in which
the following objects were found:

  [Illustration: PLATE 16
                 a. MODEL OF JADEITE BIVALVE SHELL.
                 b. LIGHT-GREEN JADEITE MASK.
                 c. AX HEAD, OR CELT. d. TERRA-COTTA CYLINDER.]

(1) The model of half a bivalve shell in light-green jadeite, very well
executed and polished both inside and out (pl. 16, _a_). On its outer
surface, following the contour of the outer edge, are seven glyphs, the
chief component of each of which is a grotesque human face.[39]

  [Illustration: FIG. 35.--Inscription on mask, plate 16, _b_.]

(2) A small mask of light-green jadeite, well polished on both surfaces,
measuring approximately 7 cm. in both diameters (pl. 16, _b_). Inscribed
on the forehead in shallow lines are the glyphs shown in figure 35,
somewhat enlarged from the actual size. Around the edge of the lower
half of the mask are seven minute perforations, while running across the
back of the forehead from ear to ear is a larger hole, evidently used
for suspension. No doubt this mask was used as a breast ornament,
similar to those portrayed in the codices and on the monoliths, the
small holes being intended for the suspension of the alligator-head
beads found with the mask, which again may have been connected along
their outward-pointing snouts by the cylindrical beads.

(3) An ax head, or celt, of light-green stone, finely polished
throughout (pl. 16, _c_), 21 cm. in length by 6.5 cm. in breadth at the
cutting edge. One side is engraved with hieroglyphs done in shallow
lines, much less carefully and neatly than those on the shell. The lower
two-thirds of the engraved side have evidently been subjected to
considerable attrition, as the surface of the stone, especially along
the lower third of the ax, has been so worn away as to render the lines
almost undecipherable. This inscription, somewhat smaller than the
original, is shown in figure 36. With these engraved objects were a
number of cylindrical beads, pierced in their long diameter, made of
very pretty mottled light and dark green jade, well polished. They
varied from 1.2 to 1.6 cm. in length, and the substance of the stone
from which they were made was distinctly crystalline on fracture.

With them were a number of small alligator heads, made of similar stone
and about the same size as the beads, pierced at the base of the skull
for suspension, six celts of green and chocolate-colored stone, all
finely polished, varying from 9 to 18 cm. in length, and a circular disk
of iron pyrites 8 cm. in diameter by 5 mm. in thickness. This object was
milled round the edges like a coin and perforated in the center. With it
was the broken half of a similar ornament; probably both of these had
been used as ear ornaments. Trenches were dug through this mound in all
directions, but nothing further was found therein.


MOUND NO. 12

Mound No. 12, at Kendal, was situated close to the last-described
mound. Its flattened summit measured 28 feet by 20 feet; the average
height was approximately 15 feet. The mound extended east and west,
and on its eastern slope large slate slabs were seen protruding from
the surface. On excavating round these they were found to be part of
a chamber measuring 7 feet by 3 feet; the south wall had caved in and
the roof slabs also had been somewhat displaced. The chamber was filled
with earth, on removing which the following objects were found upon the
floor slabs: (1) Three nearly spherical red pots, averaging 6 inches in
diameter; they were so rotten from the effect of moisture that it was
impossible to remove them. (2) Two small, rather crudely executed human
faces cut in mottled jadeite, and finely polished, with which were
three green jadeite beads. (3) A small quantity of greenish powder.
(4) Four small chisels of polished greenstone, varying from 2 to 4 cm.
in length. (5) One chisel made of very soft gray stone, which had been
covered externally with greenish paint somewhat resembling enamel, and
very closely simulating the genuine greenstone chisels with which it
was placed, except that it was much lighter in weight. Instances of
counterfeit implements and ornaments buried with the dead have been
found more than once throughout this area.

  [Illustration: FIG. 36.--Inscription on ax head, plate 16, _c_.]

Excavations were made along the flattened top of this mound, and about
16 feet to the westward of the first one a second grave was discovered.
This was in a much better state of preservation than the first, as
all the walls and the roof were in situ. It was composed throughout
of large flat irregular slabs of slate, averaging about 2 inches in
thickness. It measured 8 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet in height. The
chamber was filled with earth, and the roof was not more than 6 or 8
inches below the surface of the mound. The following objects were found
in this chamber, all resting upon the slate slabs which formed the
floor. At the north end five nearly globular red earthenware pots, of
rather coarse manufacture, each containing a stone celt, were found.
These pots had been packed closely together, in earth, and over them
a large slab of slate had been placed as if to protect them; this,
however, it failed to do, as the pots were so saturated with moisture
that it was found possible to remove only one unbroken. The celts
averaged 6 inches in length; all were well made and polished; four were
of greenstone, one of a bluish-gray stone. Close to the pots were found
a small jadeite face and three greenstone beads or pendants. Nearer
the center of the floor of the chamber were found two small cubical
objects of light greenstone 1 cm. in diameter, very closely resembling
dice, with a geometrical device inscribed in rather deep lines upon two
of their opposed surfaces; these might have been seals or stamps, or
they might have been used in playing some game. With them were a small
solid cylinder, of light greenstone, finely polished for suspension,
12 small obsidian knives, seemingly quite new, as they showed no signs
of notching from use, and six convolvulus-shaped ornaments of light
greenstone, finely polished, which had probably been used as ear plugs.
Close to the last lay a hollow cylinder of extremely hard terra cotta
7 cm. in height, inscribed externally with a geometrical device in low
relief (pl. 16, _d_). This object was undoubtedly a cylindrical seal or
stamp for use on a handle; similar specimens are not uncommon in the
south of British Honduras and in Guatemala, though in the north of the
colony and in Yucatan they are of much less frequent occurrence. Small
patches of charcoal and of green powder were found in several places
scattered over the floor of this chamber. Nothing further was found
in this mound, which was composed throughout of earth and water-worn
bowlders.

Several more mounds were excavated at Kendal, but nothing was found in
them. They were all composed of earth and large, water-worn bowlders,
the former greatly predominating. Close to many of the mounds a deep
excavation in the surface is to be seen, from which the material to
construct the mound was evidently taken. These mounds form a decided
contrast to those in the north of British Honduras and in southern
Yucatan: they are lower, flatter, more diffuse and irregular in
outline, with the line of demarcation between the base of the mound
and the surrounding soil very poorly defined. The northern mounds are
more clearly defined, with steeper sides, smaller summits, and base
lines easily distinguishable. The reason for this difference is to be
sought in the material from which the mounds were constructed, which in
the south is clay, with a small admixture of river bowlders, both of
which are easily washed down by the torrential tropical rains of the
district. Year by year the mound becomes flatter and less well defined,
till at length most of these mounds will be hardly distinguishable
from the surrounding earth. In the north, on the contrary, the mounds
are built of large blocks of limestone, with only a small admixture
of earth and limestone dust. In many cases the blocks are mortared
together, and in nearly all cases layers of cement are alternated with
layers of stone. The whole forms a practically solid block of masonry,
capable of withstanding for all time the less heavy rainfall of this
part of British Honduras and Yucatan. About the center of a triangular
space, bounded at each angle by a small mound, situated close to the
mound last described, was found a piece of water-worn rock measuring 4
feet 10 inches in length, which had evidently been carried up from the
river bed a quarter of a mile away. Three or four inches of it appeared
above the soil. Beneath the rock extended a layer of water-worn river
stones to a depth of 2 feet. Among these were found numerous fragments
of pottery and patches of charcoal. On the western side of the rock,
close to its edge, and buried 10 inches beneath the surface, were found
three rather well-chipped flint spearheads, the largest of which was 25
cm. in length (fig. 37, _a_, _b_, _c_); these were placed erect in the
earth, points upward, and close to them lay the small, eccentrically
shaped object seen in figure 38, _b_, very well chipped from dark-blue
flint, measuring 7-1/2 cm. in length. A few feet to the north of these
objects, buried at about the same depth and quite close to the rock,
were found the serrated flint spearhead shown in figure 38, _c_, 27 cm.
in length, together with the eccentrically shaped object seen in figure
38, _a_, 28 cm. in length; both of these were placed perpendicularly,
the spearhead point upward.

  [Illustration: FIG. 37.--Flint spearheads.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 38.--Flint objects.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 39.--Devices scratched on stucco in aboriginal
                           building.]

About 1-1/2 miles from the village of Benque Viejo, in the Western
District, is the only considerable aboriginal building in British
Honduras, still in a fairly good state of preservation. This is a
two-story temple standing upon a small natural elevation. Each story
contains 12 small rooms, three on the north side and three on the south
side, each of which has a narrower room in the rear. The central rooms
are 27 feet in length, the side rooms 17 feet 6 inches. The breadth of
the smaller rooms is 4 feet 6 inches; the dividing walls are 3 feet
thick. All the rooms in the lower story are filled in with large blocks
of stone, loosely held together with a small amount of mortar. This
seems to have been a favorite device among the Maya architects, its
object probably having been to give greater strength and stability to
the new upper story erected upon a building of older date. All the rooms
are roofed with the triangular so-called "American arch." The height of
the rooms is 5 feet 10 inches to the top of the wall, and 5 feet 10
inches from the top of the wall to the apex of the arch. All the rooms
had been covered with stucco, and upon the wall of one of the inner
chambers completely covered over with green mold the devices shown in
figure 39 were found, rudely scratched upon the stucco. In both the
upper and the lower part of the drawing are what may be taken as crude
representations of "Cimi," the God of Death, probably, like the
"grafiti" of Rome and Pompeii, scratched on the wall after the
abandonment of the temple by its original builders.[40] Whoever executed
the drawing must have had some knowledge, however crude, of Maya art and
mythology, as the Cimi head shown in the lower and the conventional
feather ornaments in the upper part of figure 39 are unmistakably of
Maya origin. To the north of this building lies a considerable group of
ruins.

  [Illustration: FIG. 40.--Eccentrically shaped implements found at
                           summit of mound.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 41.--Flint object found at base of stela.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 42.--Flint object found at base of stela.]

Among these three large pyramidal structures are conspicuous, which no
doubt at one time carried small temples upon their summits, some remains
of which are still to be seen. At the base of these pyramids stand three
small plain stelæ, quite unornamented. Upon the summit of one of these
mounds the eccentrically shaped implements shown in figures 40 and 44
were found. Of these, figure 40, _a_, _b_, and figure 44, _m_, _n_, _o_,
_p_, are of obsidian, while the rest are of flint. Sixty-four of these
objects were found in all, at depths varying from one or two inches to a
foot beneath the surface; all were within an area of about 2 square
yards. Some of the objects, especially the obsidians, were chipped out
with great care and accuracy; others were merely flint flakes with a few
shallow indentations chipped in their sides. On the south side of the
largest of the pyramids stood a large sculptured stela, the upper part
of which had been broken off and lay close to the lower part, which was
still embedded in cement. The sculptured part of this stela measured 10
feet 2 inches in length by 4 feet 3 inches in breadth, and about 16
inches in thickness. The sculpture, which is in low relief, represents a
captive, or sacrificial victim, prone on his face and knees, while above
him rises the figure of the priest or warrior, with elaborately
decorated feather headdress, holding in his extended right hand a small
figure of the manikin god. The limestone from which the stela is cut has
been very much defaced by the weather, and the finer details of the
sculpture can not now be deciphered. The back and sides are plain and
unsculptured. Close to this monolith lay a small stone altar, 2 feet 6
inches by 2 feet 4 inches; on its upper surface is represented the
figure of a skeleton with head bent over the extended right arm, while
the left is held in to the side, the elbow joint at right angles. In
front of the skeleton is a double row of hieroglyphs, each row
containing 7 glyphs, most of which are in a fairly good state of
preservation. An excavation was made round the part of the monolith
still standing. It was found to be surrounded by a solid foundation of
blocks of limestone, held together by cement, among which were found,
near the base of the stela, and actually in contact with it, the two
eccentrically shaped flint objects shown in figures 41 and 42. In
excavating a stela at the ruins of Naranjo, Republic of Guatemala,
Teobert Maler found the flint illustrated in figure 43, _a_, and in
clearing another stela at the same ruins 24 similar flints were found
(fig. 43, _b-s_). Of these he says:

  [Illustration: FIG. 43.--Flints found in ruins at Naranjo.]

    During the excavation of this "starfish stela" quite a collection
    of very interesting flint ornaments, 24 in number, came to light.
    Among them were crescents, such as are seen as ear ornaments on
    certain stelæ of Yāxhá and Tikal, several curved or even S-shaped
    pieces, which, perhaps, were used as nose ornaments, a serrated
    lance and a serrated plate, a piece in the shape of a cross, and
    one composed of three leaves, a double lance, single lances, etc.

    We may assume that near many stelæ, as well as in the interior or
    on the exterior of temples, in addition to incense burners and
    sacrificial bowls, there were placed certain death's-head masks or
    other figures of perishable material tricked out with ornaments,
    feathers, and locks of hair, which have long since mouldered away,
    leaving behind only those of indestructible stone. For elsewhere,
    in the vicinity of stelæ, objects of flint and obsidian are found
    in addition to pottery sherds.[41]

It will be seen that figure 43, _a_, from Naranjo is practically
identical with figure 44; _h_, from Benque Viejo, as is figure 43, _c_,
from Naranjo with figure 40, _d_, from Benque Viejo, and figure 43, _k_,
from Naranjo with figure 44, _k_, from Benque Viejo, while the objects
shown in figure 43, _h_, _l_, _m_, respectively, from Naranjo very
closely resemble those seen in figure 44, _o_, _a_, _l_, from Benque
Viejo.

  [Illustration: FIG. 44.--Objects from Benque Viejo.]

Close to Succots, which is an extension of the village of Benque Viejo,
a small mound was opened by Dr. Davis some years ago, within which were
found the objects illustrated in figure 45. These are all of obsidian
and of very eccentric and irregular shapes. The object shown in figure
45, _c_, closely resembles that shown in figure 43, _c_, from Naranjo,
and that in figure 40, _d_, from Benque Viejo, and still more closely
figure 44, _p_, from Benque Viejo, both being made of obsidian.


MOUND NO. 13

Close to Corozal, in the northern district of British Honduras, the sea
in its gradual encroachment along the coast had partially washed away a
small mound. On the beach, by the side of the mound, were found a few
fragments of human long bones, a small triangular arrowhead or javelin
head of black flint, a number of potsherds of coarse, thick, reddish
pottery, and two small obsidian knives. These had evidently been washed
out of the mound by the sea. The remaining part of the mound was dug
down. It was found to be 18 feet in diameter, less than 4 feet high at
its highest point, and built throughout of water-worn stones, sand,
and earth. Near the center and on the ground level were found human
vertebræ and parts of a skull, probably belonging with the leg bones
found on the beach. Close to these were found a small three-legged
earthenware bead vase, containing two pottery and one small polished
greenstone bead, together with one eccentrically shaped flint object.
This is probably meant to represent a "quash," or picote, with bushy
tail coiled over his back. It is rather neatly chipped from dark-yellow
flint. It measures nearly 3 inches from the curve of the tail to the
tip of the forepaw.

  [Illustration: FIG. 45.--Obsidian objects found in a mound near
                           Benque Viejo.]


MOUND NO. 14

The next mound in which an eccentrically shaped flint was discovered
is a very large one situated far away from any settlement, at the
headwaters of the Rio Hondo, in northern British Honduras. The stone
implements found in it lay near the summit, about a couple of feet
beneath the surface. They were discovered accidentally by an Indian
(from whom they were purchased) while digging out a _halib_, or gibnut,
from its hole, and consisted of: (a) A spindle-shaped stone brazo 12
inches long by 9-3/4 inches in circumference, finely polished from
grinding corn on a metate. (b) A chipped flint brazo, 7-1/2 inches
long by 10-1/2 inches in circumference, polished on one side only.
Flint brazos are exceedingly rare, as the rough surface necessary for
corn grinding must have been difficult to produce on so refractory a
material. (c) Eight stone ax heads, varying from 3-1/2 to 8-1/2 inches
in length. (d) A dark greenstone ax head, 9-1/2 inches in length, with
two shallow notches, one on each side of a shoulder situated 3 inches
from the base, probably intended to afford greater facility in hafting
the implement. (e) Two well-chipped flint spearheads, one 10-1/4, the
other 7-1/2, inches in length. (f) An oblong block of flint 6-1/2
inches in length and 6-1/2 inches in circumference. This had probably
been used as a hammerstone, since it exhibits well-defined percussion
marks at each extremity. (g) A rather roughly chipped stellate disk of
flint, 10 inches in diameter, with 13 sharp-pointed triangular rays
or spines, each about 2 inches in length, at equal intervals around
its periphery. Near the center of this object is a natural hole 3-3/4
inches in diameter.

  [Illustration: FIG. 46.--Flint object from Seven Hills.]

The upper part of this mound consisted of earth and blocks of
limestone; the lower part was not excavated. The implements were
found lying close together in a cache, loose in the soil. Numerous
rough potsherds were found, but there was no trace of human interment
discovered.

In the southern part of British Honduras, not far from Punta Gorda, is
a group of small natural elevations, known as Seven Hills. Upon the
summit of the highest of these, some years ago, the object illustrated
in figure 46 was found. This somewhat resembles a horseshoe with two
long bars, each tapering off to a point, projecting from either side.
It is very neatly chipped from grayish flint. Its extreme length is 16
inches. This implement was found just beneath the surface, covered only
by a few inches of soil. At a later date a number of trenches were dug
on the summit of this mound, but nothing except potsherds of various
kinds with flint and obsidian chips came to light.

  [Illustration: FIG. 47.--Horseshoe-shaped flint object found near San
                           Antonio.]

In figure 47 is seen one of the finest of these eccentrically
shaped flints ever found in this part of the Maya area. It is
horseshoe-shaped, chipped to a sharp edge all round, and has six
sharp spines projecting from the outer periphery (one of which has
been broken off, as shown in the figure), with shallow indentations
between them. The implement, which is 35 cm. in its greatest diameter,
is made of nearly black flint, covered with a beautiful creamy white
porcelain-like patina. It was found by an Indian in the neighborhood
of San Antonio, on the Rio Hondo, which here forms the boundary line
between Mexico and British Honduras. He was idly scratching on the
top of a small mound, buried in the bush, with his machete, when a
few inches below the surface he came upon this very remarkable flint.
Unfortunately, he took no pains to locate the mound, and as the bush in
this neighborhood is literally covered with mounds in all directions,
he has never been able to find this particular one again.

The implement shown in figure 48 was dredged up from the River
Thames, near London, at a spot where foreign-going ships were in the
habit of dumping their ballast. There can be little doubt that it
came originally from British Honduras, as flint implements of such
large size and of this peculiar type are not found outside the Maya
area. This object, as may be seen, is a crude representation of the
human form; it is 9-1/2 inches in length and is neatly chipped. A
closely similar anthropomorphic specimen is preserved in the Northesk
collection, a cast of which may be seen in the British Museum.

  [Illustration: FIG. 48.--Figure from River Thames, near London.]

It is extremely difficult to form any satisfactory theory as to the use
of these eccentrically shaped flints which will cover all the instances
in which they have been found. Teobert Maler, judging by the small
specimens, closely packed, which he found at Naranjo, considers that
they may have been used as ornaments upon death's head masks, placed
near stelæ and temples, the more perishable parts of which have
disappeared. This theory could hardly apply to the immense specimens
from the Douglas, Orange Walk, and Seven Hills mounds, some of which
are, moreover, obviously intended as weapons, and not as ornaments.
Stevens, the author of "Flint Chips," with only the three large
specimens found in a cave inland from the Bay of Honduras to judge from,
considers that they may have served as "weapons of parade, like the
state partisan or halbert of later times;" it is perfectly obvious,
however, that the zoomorphic forms from Corozal and Douglas, and the
small specimens from Benque Viejo, Naranjo, Kendal, and Santa Rita,
could not have been intended for this purpose. Finding small,
beautifully chipped crescents, crosses, and rings of obsidian and
varicolored flints, as have been discovered at Benque Viejo and Succots,
one would be inclined to think that they were intended as earrings,
gorgets, and breast ornaments, especially as one sees such forms
frequently recurring in the ornaments worn by figures on the stelæ in
the neighborhood. Finding the huge flints pictured in plate 15, _b_,
_d_, especially when associated, as they were, with the large flint
spearheads illustrated in plate 15, _c_, _f_, the conclusion that they
were intended as weapons would be almost irresistible.

The number of these objects found at each of the 11 sites which have
been described varies from 1 to 64. On 5 of the 11 occasions they were
undoubtedly associated with human interments; in 4 of the remaining 6
they were found lying, superficially placed, on the summits of mounds,
which for various reasons were not thoroughly excavated, and may or may
not have been sepulchral in function; in the two remaining finds the
flints were placed closely adjacent to sculptured stelæ, and these again
may have been used to mark the grave of some priest or cacique, though
they more frequently marked the lapse of certain time periods. The
commonest form assumed by these objects is the crescent or some variant
of it. Of the 11 sites excavated, this form was found in no fewer than
8. The crescent is in some cases quite plain, in some indented or spiked
along the convexity, and is in one instance furnished with long spines
on each side.

In every instance (except that of the chambered mound at Douglas) where
these implements were found in mounds they were placed quite
superficially at the summit of the mound; indeed at Benque Viejo, Seven
Hills, and Santa Rita it seems probable that they had not been buried
originally at all, but merely placed upon the summit of the mound and in
course of time became covered with a layer of humus from decaying
vegetation in the vicinity.

  [Illustration: FIG. 49.--Flint objects from Tennessee.]

Similar flint objects have been found in other parts of the world,
notably at Brionio in Italy and in Stuart, Smith, and Humphrey Counties,
Tennessee. In figure 49, _b_-_n_, are shown somewhat rough outline
sketches of the Tennessee objects, and in figure 50, _a_-_p_, are
represented a selection of the most important objects found at Brionio,
now in the collection of the late Professor Giglioli at Florence. The
Tennessee objects are to be seen at Washington. The latter are small
when compared with the largest of the Maya specimens, but are neatly
chipped, whereas the Brionio objects are very crudely blocked out,
mostly from black flint.

It will be observed that figure 49, _c_, _d_, _g_, from Tennessee, shows
specimens almost identical with figure 50, _p_, from Brionio, and with
the turtle, pictured in plate 15, _g_, from the Douglas chambered mound;
again the spiked crescents, figure 50, _b_, _c_, _n_, from Brionio,
closely resemble the very much larger spiked crescent illustrated in
plate 15, _e_, from the Douglas chambered mound, and still more closely
the spiked crescent figured in "Flint Chips" (from Wilson, Prehistoric
Man, op. cit., p. 214). Though these objects are not found in Central
America outside the Maya area, the Aztec were sufficiently expert in the
art of flint and obsidian chipping to have produced them had they
wished. In figure 49, _a_, is seen the outline of a type of labret worn
by the Aztecs, chipped out of both flint and obsidian, which compares
favorably in workmanship with any of the objects from the Maya area.

In reviewing the evidence it would appear that these eccentrically
shaped objects were not employed either as implements or as weapons,
most of them being utterly unsuited in both size and shape for such
purposes; moreover, none of them show any signs of wear or use. Neither
were they used as ornaments, as many of them are too large and heavy,
while the more roughly chipped specimens would be quite unadapted for
such a purpose. Judging by the fact that 5 at least of the 11 separate
finds wore associated with human burials, it seems probable that these
objects were purely ceremonial in use; that they were most frequently,
if not invariably, buried with the dead, either on top of the
sepulchral mound, in close association with the corpse, or by the side
of a memorial stela; and that they were manufactured and used solely
for this purpose.

  [Illustration: FIG. 50.--Flint objects from Italy.]


MOUND NO. 15

Mound No. 15 was situated on the south bank of the Rio Hondo, about
5 miles from its mouth, near the village of Santa Helena. This was
a conical mound 25 feet in height and 120 feet in circumference at
the base. Excavation was begun at the summit of the mound, which
was somewhat flattened. For the first foot the soil consisted of
light-brown earth, which contained nothing of interest.

  [Illustration: FIG. 51.--Small cup-shaped vase from Mound No. 15.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 52.--Objects from Mound No. 15.]

For the next 3-1/2 feet there were large blocks of limestone, the
interstices between which were filled with limestone dust and débris.
In these were found large quantities of potsherds, some well painted
and polished, together with part of the inferior maxilla of a
medium-sized carnivore, probably a puma. At a depth of 3-1/2 feet a
number of stone flags, each nearly 5 feet in length and from 4 to 6
inches in thickness, were exposed; on removing these a small chamber
appeared, of which the flags formed the roof. The walls of the chamber,
or cist, were built of squared stones mortared together; it was 6 feet
long, 6 feet high, and 4 feet broad; the floor was of light-brown, very
fine river sand. On carefully removing the sand the following objects
were brought to light at depths varying from 3 feet below the surface
of the sand to the bottom of the chamber: (a) A small round, cup-shaped
vase, shown in figure 51, painted bright yellow and finely polished.
It is 10 cm. high by 8-1/2 cm. in its greatest diameter. On its outer
surface are two grotesque monkey-like figures, the outline of one of
which is shown in figure 52 _a_. (b) A small thin bowl of the shape
shown in figure 52 _e_, painted yellow throughout, well polished, and
ornamented exteriorly with geometrical devices in red and black. (c)
A somewhat larger bowl than the next preceding, of the shape seen in
figure 52 _f_. The geometrical ornamentation on the outer surface is
executed in low relief, and was afterwards painted over. (d) A large
circular plaque painted yellow throughout, 42 cm. in diameter. This
plaque had been polished but shows considerable signs of hard usage
before burial. (e) A plaque-like vessel, 9 cm. in height, with the
design represented in figure 52 _d_, of a human face separated from a
dragon's head by the Maya numeral 7, repeated around the outer surface
of its rim. (f) A shallow plaque, 36 cm. in diameter, painted yellow
throughout, and polished; on the inner surface of the rim are repeated
twice, outlined in black lines, the bird and the curious mythological
animal seen in figure 52, _b_, _c_. (g) A basin-shaped vessel, painted
a deep reddish-brown and finely polished throughout, with a very
attractive and intricate device of interlacing diamond-shaped figures
around the inside of the rim. (h) A vessel closely similar to the
preceding, but smaller and not so well polished. It was broken into a
number of pieces when found. (i) A small round pot, with flaring rim,
of common red ware, showing no attempt at decoration. (j) Scattered
throughout the sand, in the midst of these pots, were found 35 very
small, flat, circular disks or beads, averaging about one-twelfth inch
in thickness. Some were of greenstone, others of a reddish-yellow stone
mottled with white. All were well polished.

  [Illustration: PLATE 17
                 PAINTED BASIN AND COVER FROM MOUND NO. 16]

On removing the sand to a depth of 12 feet the bottom of the chamber was
reached. The floor, which was composed of hard mortar, measured 4 by 3
feet, as the chamber was somewhat funnel-shaped, narrowing as it
descended. On the bottom of the chamber were found a number of small
oyster and cockle shells, with fragments of human bones. Among these was
an inferior maxilla in fairly good state of preservation; from the facts
that the tooth sockets had disappeared, that there was considerable
atrophy along the alveolar processes and widening of the angle between
the horizontal and vertical sections of the bone, it had probably
belonged to a person of advanced age.


MOUND NO. 16

Mound No. 16 was situated about 2 miles due north of the last-described
mound, close to the north bank of the Rio Hondo, within the territory of
Quintana Roo. It was discovered by an Indian, who had cut a piece of
virgin bush with the object of making a milpa. The mound was 35 feet in
height by 250 feet in circumference at the base; in shape it resembled a
truncated cone, the flattened summit of which measured 30 feet in one
direction by 6 feet in the other. The mound was composed throughout of
rough blocks of limestone, the interstices of which were filled in with
limestone dust and an unusually large quantity of light-brown earth.
Excavation was commenced at the top of the mound; for the first 6 feet
nothing except a few potsherds was found. Scattered through the next 2
feet of the mound the following objects were brought to light; these
were mingled indiscriminately with the limestone blocks of which the
mound was built, quite unprotected by cist or chamber: (a) A
basin-shaped vessel 20 cm. in diameter, 10 cm. in height (pl. 17),
covered by a round conical lid with a semicircular handle. Both basin
and cover are painted black and polished, inside and out. Upon the
outer surface of the vase and the upper surface of the lid are incised
in low relief a series of pictographs, identical upon both. From the
nature of the design and the fact that the vase contained a number of
fragments of human bones, it seems probable that it was intended for a
cinerary urn. The design is of considerable interest and worthy of
detailed consideration. The most prominent object upon both the lid and
the vase itself is a naked human figure in a recumbent position, with
the arms flexed over the chest and abdomen and the knees and thighs
semiflexed. The ornaments worn consist of an elaborate feather-decorated
headdress, a labret, or nose ornament (it is somewhat difficult to
determine which), and large bead anklets and wristlets. Below the head,
on the body of the vase, is the conventionalized representation of a
bird (fig. 53) with extended drooping wings, and a rectangular object
occupying the position of the beak. On the lid, probably from lack of
room, this bird is represented only by the rectangular object, beneath
which is seen the conventionalized serpent's head, represented only by
the upper jaw, from which project the head and hand of a human being,
whom it is in the act of swallowing. This monster, with a human head
projecting from its mouth, is frequently represented in mounds in this
area, usually in the form of a clay figurine.

  [Illustration: FIG. 53.--Conventionalized representation of bird on
                           vessel shown in plate 17.]

The next figure is probably intended to represent Quetzalcoatl, the
Cuculcan of the Maya, and God B of the Codices. It is the shrunken
bearded face of an old man, with a single tooth in the lower jaw, very
prominent nose, and a bird's head (probably that of the owl) in the
headdress. These are all well-recognized characteristics of this god.
At the back part of the headdress of the god, and connected with it,
is a human face. Immediately above the head of Cuculcan is depicted a
fish, with a flower-like object in front of its mouth (fig. 54), which
is probably connected with this god, who is frequently associated with
objects connoting water, vegetation, and fertility, as fish, flowers,
water plants, leaves, and shells.

  [Illustration: FIG. 54.--Decoration on vessel shown in plate 17.]

The next figure probably represents Schellhas's God K of the Codices.
This god possesses an elaborate foliated nose, and is usually closely
associated with God B, as he is in the present instance; indeed Brinton
and Fewkes regard him as being merely a special manifestation of the
latter god, while Spinden is of the opinion that his face is derived
from that of the serpent so constantly associated with God B.[42] The
lower jaw of the god seems to consist of a dry bone.

  [Illustration: PLATE 18
                 POTTERY FROM MOUND NO. 16]

  [Illustration: FIG. 55.--Perforated beads found in Mound No. 16.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 56.--Jadeite beads found in Mound No. 16.]

Immediately behind God K is repeated the design of the serpent
swallowing a human head, above which is a striated bar, whose sole
purpose seemingly is to decorate a vacant space. Above this again is a
bar with feathers or leaves projecting from it, which may possibly be
connected with the headdress of God B, and at the top is repeated the
figure of the fish, with the circular object in front of its mouth.
Next to these is again seen the head of the god Cuculcan, after which
the whole series recommences with the prone naked human figure. (b)
A vessel exactly similar in size, color, and shape to the one last
described (pl. 18, _a_). The outer surface is decorated by four curious
monkey-like creatures, sculptured in low relief, separated from each
other by ovate spaces inclosed in double parallel lines and filled with
cross-hatching. Above and below is a border of frets, also executed
in low relief. The faces of these monkeys are represented by a simple
oval, no attempt having been made to depict any of the features. The
hands are furnished with huge claw-like fingers, and the tails, which
are of great length, are curled over the back. The cover of this vessel
(pl. 18, _a_) is circular, somewhat funnel-shaped, 23 cm. in diameter.
Upon its outer surface is executed, in low relief, a monkey almost
exactly similar to those which appear on the outer surface of the vase,
except that it is somewhat larger and is seen in front view, not in
profile. The face of the monkey is carefully molded in high relief
to form the handle of the lid, while between his hands he grasps an
ovate object identical with those on the vase. (c) The lid of a vessel
corresponding exactly to the lid of the vessel first described. The pot
to which it belonged could not be found (pl. 18, _b_). (d) A pair of
cylindrical vases, each standing upon three short, hollow, oval legs.

  [Illustration: FIG. 57.--_a._ Circular shell disks from Mound No. 16.
                           _b._ Greenstone ear plugs from Mound No. 17.]

Both are made of extremely thin, brittle pottery painted a dirty yellow
and polished throughout, with no ornament except a broad red stripe,
which passes obliquely around the whole of the outer surface of each
vase. (e) Two shallow circular plaques, painted reddish-brown, and
polished throughout, with a geometrical device in thin black lines
around the inner surface of the rim of each. (f) A quantity of bones,
probably those of a _halib_ or gibnut, and of a wild turkey. These were
found under a large block of rough limestone. (g) A number of univalve
shells, each about 1 inch in length, perforated at the apex in two
places, as if for suspension in the form of a necklace or ornamental
border.[43] With these shells was found half of a large cockle-like
bivalve, painted red throughout, and perforated, possibly for use as a
gorget. (h) Thirteen large, round, perforated beads (fig. 55). Some of
these are reddish in color, and show traces of polishing. With these
were the three jadeite beads pictured in figure 56; two of these are
cylindrical, with a knob at one end, while the third is nearly
spherical; all are finely polished; they are made of light and
dark-green mottled jadeite. (i) A single small oyster shell, with a
great number of cockle shells. (j) Two circular disks of shell,
represented in figure 57, _a_, exhibiting the front and back view. The
central part is of a deep reddish color, and is well polished. Each disk
is 5 cm. in diameter and is perforated at the center. They were probably
used as ear ornaments. Excavations were made in this mound to the ground
level, but no additional objects were found in it.


MOUND NO. 17

  [Illustration: FIG. 58.--Obsidian disk inserted in tooth of skeleton
                           found in Mound No. 17.]

Mound No. 17 was situated within a mile of the mound last described,
on high ground, about 1-1/2 miles from the Rio Hondo, from which it
is separated by a belt of swamp. It was conical in shape, about 40
feet high, nearly 90 yards in circumference, and was built throughout
of large blocks of limestone, the interstices being filled with a
friable mortar, made seemingly from limestone dust, earth, and sand
mixed together. Near the summit was an irregular opening, about 4 feet
across, which led into a small stone-faced chamber, 15 feet long, 5
feet broad, and 6 feet high. The opening had been made by the falling
in of one of the flags which formed the roof of the chamber; this was
found within the chamber with a pile of débris. The floor was composed
of large flat flags, on removing one of which an aperture was made
which led into a second chamber, of exactly the same size as the first,
and immediately beneath it. The floor of this was covered to a depth of
about 12 inches with a layer of soft brown river sand, in which were
found: (a) Parts of a human skeleton, seemingly belonging to an adult
male, the bones of which were very friable and greatly eroded. In one
of the incisor teeth was inserted a small disk of obsidian, the outer
surface of which was highly polished (fig. 58). These ornamental tooth
fillings are rather rare, though they have been found from time to
time in Yucatan and as far south as Quirigua. They were usually made
from greenstone, obsidian, or iron pyrites, all highly polished, the
only teeth ornamented being the incisors and canines, usually in the
upper jaw. The plugging seems to have been exclusively for ornamental
purposes, not with any idea of filling a cavity, the result of caries
in the tooth.[44]

(b) A shallow plaque, 28 cm. in diameter, painted throughout a dark
reddish-yellow, and finely polished. Upon the upper surface was
outlined in fine black lines a bird, apparently a sea hawk, carrying
in its claw a good-sized fish, possibly a stone bass (fig. 59). The
artist probably witnessed this event many times, as the mouth of the
Rio Hondo, where stone bass abound, is a favorite fishing ground for
sea hawks and frigate birds.

(c) A number of painted and glazed potsherds of all sizes.

  [Illustration: FIG. 59.--Bird carrying a fish outlined on shallow
                           plaque found in Mound No. 17.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 60.--Cylindrical pottery vase found in Mound
                           No. 17.]

Beneath this second chamber a third was discovered, roofed in with rough
flags, of the same dimensions as the other two. The floor of this
chamber was cemented over; nothing except limestone blocks and mortar
was found between it and the bottom of the mound. Upon the floor lay a
solitary plaque, of a deep reddish-yellow color, the upper surface
divided by black lines into four equal spaces, in each of which was
crudely outlined in black a fish, probably meant to represent a stone
bass. On digging into the summit of the mound outside the area occupied
by the chambers, the following objects were brought to light: (a) A
cylindrical vase of light, thin, well-made pottery, 16-1/2 cm. high by
13 cm. in diameter, painted light yellow throughout and finely polished
(fig. 60). Upon one side of the vase, within an oblong space outlined in
black, are a number of curious mythological animals, above which is a
row of six glyphs, seemingly explanatory of the picture beneath (pl. 19,
_a_). Both animals and glyphs are very carefully executed in red, black,
and brown, on a yellow background. The lowest figure on the right
somewhat resembles that on a vase in the American Museum of Natural
History,[45] upon which the Long-nosed god is associated with bulblike
objects, flowers, and a bird (probably a pelican). On this vase the
Long-nosed god is seen with a bulblike object, possibly a root, from
which project interlacing stalks, at the ends of which are water-lily
buds.

  [Illustration: PLATE 19
                 a. DECORATION ON VASE SHOWN IN FIGURE 60
                 b. DECORATION OF VESSEL FROM MOUND NO. 17]

Above these is a bird, possibly a sea hawk. The whole connotes water,
or fertility. (b) A second vase, similar in shape, but somewhat larger
(fig. 61), is painted yellow and polished throughout. Upon this is
depicted a cruciform object, with outgrowths from the upper and lateral
limbs of the cross, probably a highly conventionalized tree. (c) A
shallow circular plaque, 36 cm. in diameter, painted light yellow, and
polished throughout. Upon its upper surface is painted, in red and
black, a coiled plumed serpent (fig. 62), doubtless intended to
represent Cuculcan, the "Feathered Serpent." (d) Two circular objects of
polished greenstone, somewhat resembling broad-brimmed hats from which
the crowns have been removed (see fig. 57, _b_). Each has on the upper
surface of the brim a small ovate piece of mother-of-pearl, firmly
cemented to the stone. These objects were probably used as ear plugs;
with them were five small perforated spherical beads of polished
greenstone.

  [Illustration: FIG. 61.--Larger pottery vase found in Mound No. 17.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 62.--Coiled plumed serpent painted on plaque found
                           in Mound No. 17.]

At the base of the northern aspect of this mound was a small square
enclosure, surrounded by a stone wall 2 to 3 feet in height. On digging
into this, near its center, an alligator made of rough pottery, 15
inches long, was discovered. In the center of its back is a small
circular opening, covered by a conical stopper, leading into the hollow
interior, in which was found a small perforated polished jadeite bead,
in the form of a grotesque human face. Close to the alligator lay a
basin-shaped vessel, 28 cm. in diameter, painted yellow, and polished
throughout. In the center of this, outlined in thin black lines, is the
object seen in plate 19, _b_, probably meant to represent the two-headed
dragon so common in Maya art.


MOUND NO. 18

Mound No. 18, situated less than half a mile from the next preceding,
was 10 feet high, 70 feet in circumference, roughly conical in shape,
and firmly built throughout of blocks of limestone the interstices
between which were filled with earth and limestone dust. At the bottom
of the mound, near its center, resting on the ground, was a cist, about
2 feet in diameter, roughly constructed of large flags of limestone.
Within this were found two vessels: (a) A basin-shaped specimen of thin
pottery, painted reddish-yellow and polished throughout; on its inner
surface is depicted, in fine black lines, an object closely resembling a
four-leafed shamrock. (b) A vase of the shape shown in figure 63, 13 cm.
high and 13 cm. in diameter. This is made of rather thick pottery; it
is painted light yellow and polished throughout. On the outer surface
of the rim, outlined in thin black lines, is the glyph represented in
figure 64, which is repeated all the way round the circumference. No
additional objects were found in this cyst, nor were there any traces of
bones in it, or in the rest of the mound, which was afterward examined.

  [Illustration: FIG. 63.--Pottery vase found in Mound No. 18.]


MOUND NO. 19

Mound No. 19, situated close to the preceding, was 6 feet in height,
with flattened top, built solidly throughout of limestone blocks and a
friable mortarlike substance. At the ground level, near the center of
the mound, were discovered two cists, placed side by side, separated by
a partition wall built of blocks of cut stone. Each cist was 6 feet
long, 3 feet broad, nearly 4 feet deep, solidly constructed of stones
mortared together. Neither the cists nor the body of the mound contained
anything of interest except a few fragments of bone in the last stages
of disintegration.


MOUND NO. 20

  [Illustration: FIG. 64.--Glyph outlined on outer surface of rim of
                           vase shown in fig. 63.]

Mound No. 20 was situated at Pueblo Nuevo, about 6 miles from the mouth
of the Rio Nuevo, in the northern district of British Honduras. The
mound was about 100 feet in length and varied from 8 to 12 feet in
height and from 15 to 25 feet in breadth. It was built throughout of
earth, limestone dust, and blocks of limestone, a great many of which
had been squared. Immediately beneath the surface, running east and west
along the long diameter of the mound and nearly centrally placed in it,
was the upper surface of a wall, which had evidently at one time formed
part of a building of considerable size. This wall was built of finely
squared blocks of limestone mortared together, and was somewhat more
than 18 inches thick. It extended for 40 feet, turning at right angles
at both the eastern and western extremities and was broken by a single
opening, 3-1/2 feet broad at the center. The part of the wall left
standing varied from 2 to 3-1/2 feet in height and was covered on its
inner surface by a layer of smooth, yellow, very hard cement; the outer
surface, which still retained traces of painted stucco moldings, ended
below in a floor of hard cement 12 inches thick. The greater part of
these moldings had been broken away, but portions were still adherent to
the wall and great quantities of fragments, painted red and blue, were
found immediately beneath the wall from which they had been broken. The
most important of these were: (a) Two human torsos, one (the more
elaborate) of which is seen in figure 65, _c_. (b) Three human heads,
one of which is represented in figure 65, _b_, in situ. Both heads and
torsos are life size, and both are painted red and blue throughout.[46]
(c) Two headdresses, one of which is seen in situ in figure 65, _a_; the
other is almost precisely similar in coloring and design. (d) Fragments
of elaborately molded pillars, which had originally separated the
figures on the wall. A portion of one of these is shown in figure 66.
This design was repeated three times upon the front of the pillar, the
back of which was flattened for attachment to the wall. Great quantities
of fragments of painted stucco, of all shapes and sizes, were dug out of
the mound, but the human figures, with the pillars which separated them,
were the only objects the original positions of which on the wall it was
possible to determine with certainty. Resting upon the layer of hard
cement in which the wall terminated below, between 5 and 6 feet from the
eastern end and close to the wall itself, was found an adult human
skeleton, the bones of which were huddled together within a very small
compass, in a manner suggesting secondary burial. In removing these
bones nearly all of them crumbled to pieces. Throughout the whole mound
were found numerous potsherds, some of very fine pottery, colored and
polished; others thick, rough, and undecorated. Fragments of flint and
obsidian, broken flint spearheads and scrapers, and broken obsidian
knives were also found.

  [Illustration: FIG. 65.--Torso, head, and headdress from Mound
                           No. 20.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 66.--Fragment of pillar found in Mound No. 20.]


MOUND NO. 21

Mound No. 21 was situated near Corozal, in the northern district of
British Honduras. This mound had very steep sides; it was 50 foot in
height by 200 feet in circumference, and was built of blocks of
limestone, the interstices of which were filled with friable mortar.
Toward the west the mound joined a smaller mound, 20 feet in height. A
rumor was current among the Indians in the neighborhood that some years
before a number of fragments of clay idols had been found lying on the
surface of the earth near the mound. Excavations were consequently made
all around the mound, for a distance of 10 to 15 yards from its base,
through the alluvial soil, down to the limestone rock, a distance of 6
inches to 2 feet. These excavations brought to light enormous quantities
of fragments of crude, coarse pottery vessels, for the greater part the
remains of large hourglass-shaped incense burners, which had been
decorated on their outer surfaces with either a human head or an entire
human figure. Among these fragments were animal heads in terra cotta,
the snake and the dragon being of most frequent occurrence, but the
deer, alligator, and tiger also being represented. Heads of the owl, the
wild turkey, and the humming bird likewise were found. Fragments of
about a dozen human faces were brought to light, with the usual nose
ornaments, large round earrings, and labrets. Quilted cotton, stud
decorated breastplates, sandaled feet, and bracelet-decorated hands and
arms were also plentiful. The right arm seems in most cases to have been
extended, holding in the upward turned palm some object as a gift or
offering. These objects vary considerably; three are undoubtedly wild
turkeys, with their long necks coiled around their bodies; two are
palm-leaf fans attached to handles; one appears to be a shallow saucer
containing three small cakes; while two are pyramidal, spike-covered
objects, possibly meant to represent the fruit of the pitaya cactus.
With these fragments of pottery were found four entire oval pottery
vases, each about 4 inches high, standing on three short legs, each
containing a few clay and polished greenstone beads. Close to these was
a pair of vases, shaped like a right and left foot and leg, of the size
approximately of those of a child 7 or 8 years of age, greatly expanded
above the ankle. These vases showed traces of white and blue paint,
which had, however, almost completely worn off; around them were a
considerable number of fragments of the bones of deer and peccary, very
much decayed. Close to the base of the mound was found an oval block of
limestone, which formed the nucleus of a small hill, 2 to 3 feet high
and 5 to 6 feet in diameter, composed almost entirely of pottery
fragments, with a capping of humus. It is not improbable that this was
the spot on which the ceremonial destruction of these incense burners
took place, the fragments being scattered in all directions around the
entire circumference of the large mound.


MOUND NO. 22

Mound No. 22, situated at Saltillo, near the mouth of the Rio Nuevo,
northern district of British Honduras, was partially explored in 1908-9
on behalf of the Institute of Archæology of Liverpool University. The
mound was about 30 feet high; it was built of limestone blocks,
limestone dust, and rubble. It stands at one corner of a quadrangular
space measuring 80 by 35 yards, and elevated from 4 to 5 feet above the
surrounding ground level. This space is encompassed by four mounds,
joined by a bank or rampart averaging 10 feet high. Around the base of
the mound a great number of fragments of pottery incense burners were
found, with the images of the gods, which decorated them externally.
Eight complete heads and two broken ones were recovered, together with
arms, legs, bodies with quilted cotton breastplates and _maxtlis_,
elaborate headdresses, and various objects held in the hands of the
figures. These vessels are almost exactly similar to those found along
the valley of the Usumasintla and Rio de la Pasion, described by Seler
in his "Antiquities of Guatemala." Rude specimens, with the face of the
god only decorating the outside of the vessel, were found by Sapper and
Charnay in use among the Lacandon Indians a few years ago. The dress and
ornaments of these clay figurines, which vary from 1 to 2 feet in
height, are those found almost universally throughout the Maya area. The
large circular ear ornaments, with a tassel or twisted pendant hanging
from the center, the curious projecting curved ornament above the nose,
the small button-like labrets at each corner of the mouth, are present
in all, and are highly characteristic. On all the feet elaborate sandals
are worn, fastened by thongs attached between the first and second and
third and fourth toes, with a band passing around the ankle ending in a
broad dependent flap. Around the legs are plain bands and strings of
beads; around the wrists, strings of beads, in some cases fastened by an
ornamental loop. The breastplates are of quilted cotton, some very
elaborate, and decorated with beads, studs, and tassels, while below the
breastplate covering the genitals is the _maxtli_, or small apron,
commonly worn by both Maya and Aztec. The objects held in the hands
consist of birds, fans, globes, incense burners, and other less easily
distinguishable articles. The whole of the space within the earthwork
appears to have been sprinkled with these fragments of pottery vases and
idols, but it was only around the base of the large mound that entire
heads were found. The fragments seem to have been originally placed on
the earth, and in course of time to have been covered by a thin layer of
humus from decaying vegetation, as many of them still lie on the
surface, and nowhere are they buried more than a few inches, except at
the base of the mound, where earth from its side, washed down by rains,
would naturally have covered them with a slightly deeper layer. On
making excavations at various points within the enclosed space, the
floor was found to consist first of the earth which contained the broken
incense burners, with some blocks of limestone, and beneath this of a
layer about 4 feet thick composed of marl dust, very small fragments of
pottery, and rubble, welded together into an almost cement-like mass.


MOUND NO. 23

Mound No. 23 was situated near the northern end of Chetumal Bay, on
the east coast of Yucatan. The mound was 12 feet in height, roughly
circular in shape, and 12 yards in diameter at the base. The top was
flattened, and near its center a circular space 10 feet in diameter was
inclosed by a low, roughly built stone wall. On digging within this
space there were brought to light, immediately beneath the surface, the
following objects:

(a) Part of a large hourglass-shaped incense burner in rough pottery,
decorated with a human figure in high relief, 20 inches high.
Unfortunately the left arm and leg and part of the chest are missing
from this figure, which, judging by the headdress, curved nose, and
tusk-like teeth, is probably intended to represent the God Cuculcan.
The left foot is sandaled, and on the left wrist is a loop-fastened
string of beads, while over the front of the chest hangs a breastplate
of quilted cotton, decorated with flaps and fastened over the
shoulders.[47] Round the neck is a flat gorget, decorated with round
bosses, and in the ears are large circular ear plugs with tassels
dependent from their centers. Over the upper part of the nose is a
curious curved, snake-like ornament. The lofty headdress, with broad
flaps extending over each ear almost to the shoulders, has in front the
head and upper jaw of some mythological animal, the latter projecting
well over the face of the god, as if in the act of swallowing him.
Pointing downward from the plumed ornament on the right side of the
figure (the corresponding one on the left has been broken away) is
a crotalus head, which so often accompanies representations of this
god. The figure still exhibits traces of blue and white paint on that
part of the face protected by the broad flap of the headdress, and
originally doubtless the whole was painted in various colors, which
first exposure to rain and afterward burial in moist earth, have almost
completely obliterated. (b) An earthenware figure, 26 inches in
height, which doubtless at one time ornamented the outer surface of a
large incense burner. The left foot and leg are gone; the right foot is
covered with a sandal held on by a curved heelpiece rising above the
back of the ankle, and fastened in a bow in front of the instep, while
a leather thong passing between the great and second toe is attached
to this, holding the front part of the sandal in place. Round the leg
is a broad band, with a row of semilunar ornaments projecting downward
from it. The _maxtli_ has been broken away, but the quilted cotton
chest covering is still in position. This is held in place by bands
passing over the shoulders, and is ornamented by a row of five circular
studs passing down its center, with long tassels below, which must
have hung on each side of the _maxtli_, and tassels above, attached
near the shoulder, which hang down on each side of it. The throat is
covered by a broad band, decorated along its lower edge with four pairs
of small circular studs. Round the left wrist is a bracelet composed
of six flat oval beads, fastened in front by an ornamental loop. The
left arm is extended, and in the hand, held palm upward, is grasped
an acorn-shaped object from which project nine spikes. From each side
of the mouth project long curved tusks. The nose is of unusual shape,
being long, straight, and slender; the bridge is covered by a curved
snake-like object. The headdress rises 6 inches above the superciliary
ridges; its lower part consists of the head and upper mandible of
the bill of some bird, probably a hawk or eagle. Above this rises a
hollow cylindrical erection, with the upper border scalloped, supported
on each side by objects which suggest broad stone blades, hafted in
club-shaped handles, and ornamented in front with a plume of feathers.
There can be little doubt that this figure is meant to represent the
God Itzamna, as the sunken cheeks, the single large tooth on each
side of the mouth, and the prominent, though well-formed nose, are
all characteristics of this god. (c) An earthenware figure, closely
similar in size and appearance to those just described. Of the face
only the left eye, the left side of the mouth, and the nose are left;
the last named is short, rounded, and well formed, and is ornamented
at its root with a small round stud. (d) Fragments of a rough bowl
of yellowish pottery, which must have been of considerable size.
Unfortunately only four fragments were found; these exhibit on their
outer surfaces parts of a hieroglyphic inscription, roughly incised in
the clay while it was soft, with some sharp-pointed instrument. Of the
many glyphic inscriptions which have been found at different times in
British Honduras, painted on pottery and stucco and incised on pottery,
stone, and other material, none has proved to be an initial series,
which would fix the period in the Maya long count when the mounds,
temples, burial places, and other monuments scattered throughout this
colony, were constructed. According to recent researches the latest
date recorded by an initial series on the monoliths of Quirigua, in
Guatemala, is within about 70 years of the earliest date recorded by
any of the initial series found up to the present among the ruins of
Yucatan.[48] As the tide of Maya migration was undoubtedly from south
to north, and as British Honduras stands midway between Guatemala and
Yucatan, it is only reasonable to suppose that the colonization of
the greater part of it by the Maya took place at some period between
the abandonment of the cities of Quirigua and Coban, and the rise of
Chichen Itza, Uxmal, and other Yucatan cities. This theory is borne
out by the fact that the hieroglyphic inscriptions and pictographs
found in the colony are closely allied to those found both in the
northern and southern cities; moreover, the painted stucco and wooden
lintels so common in Yucatan, but not found in the south, are present
here, while the sculptured stelæ found in the south, but of extreme
rarity in northern Yucatan, are (though not very numerous and poorly
executed) found in British Honduras. (e) Large quantities of fragments
of rough pottery vases and bowls; some of these evidently belonged
to hourglass-shaped incense burners, 2 to 3 feet high, decorated
with incised lines and glyphs, raised bands, and studs, but without
human figures on their exterior surfaces. A number of these fragments
were taken down to the camp of some chicle bleeders in the vicinity;
unfortunately in the night the palm-leaf shelters caught fire and the
whole camp was burned to the ground, most of the potsherds being lost
or destroyed. Among these were probably the missing parts of the clay
figures and of the hieroglyphic-covered pot. The whole of the mound was
dug down, but with the exception of traces of a wall built of squared
stones on the ground level, nothing worthy of note was found in it. It
is almost certain that this mound had never been visited from the time
of its erection till its discovery last year by chicle bleeders looking
for sapodilla trees in this very remote corner of Yucatan. The clay
images were lying on the top of the mound, partially uncovered, and had
anyone, even an Indian, visited the place, they would almost certainly
have removed these, as there is always a ready market for _ídolos_, as
the Indians call every relic of their ancestors, among curio collectors
who visit Belize.

  [Illustration: PLATE 20
                 INCENSE BURNER FROM MOUND NO. 24]

  [Illustration: FIG. 67.--Another view of incense burner shown in
                           plate 20.]


MOUND NO. 24

Mound No. 24 was situated near the coast, at the northern extremity
of Chetumal Bay, in Yucatan. This mound was 10 feet high by about 10
yards in diameter. Upon the summit, which was flattened, were found a
great number of rough potsherds, partially buried in a layer of humus
from 6 to 12 inches deep. These were evidently fragments of incense
burners, as arms, legs, and parts of headdresses, faces, _maxtlis_,
and breastplates were plentiful among them. Near the center of the
summit, partially projecting from the earth, was discovered the almost
complete incense burner shown in plate 20 and figure 67. The vessel
which served as a receptacle for the incense is 15-1/2 inches high by 9
inches in diameter at the mouth. The human figure which decorates the
side of the vessel is 22 inches in height from the top of the headdress
to the sole of the sandals. The figurine was not complete when first
discovered, as the hands, arms, foot, _maxtli_, and feather ornaments
from the sides and headdress were missing; nearly all of these,
however, were unearthed, mixed with other pieces of pottery, not far
from the incense burner. The headdress consists of a flat, broad cap
with slightly projecting rim and large quadrangular flaps, which extend
downward and outward over the large ear plugs. The back of the cap
extends upward 3 inches; the crown is decorated with feather ornaments,
while on each side appears an object resembling half an ear of maize,
from the top of which depends a tassel. The nose is sharp, thin, and
prominent; starting on each side of it and passing down almost to the
angles of the jaw, where it ends in a little upward curl, is what might
be intended as either a mustache or some form of nose ornament. From
each angle of the mouth projects a circular labret; this evidently
passes behind the upper lip, which it causes to bulge considerably.
The ear plugs are large, round, and funnel-shaped (pl. 20); these, as
well as the shoulders, show traces of blue paint, with which the entire
figure was evidently at one time covered. Around the neck is a flat
collar decorated with five circular studs, to the sides and front of
which is attached a hollow cylindrical bar, which supports the quilted
cotton breastplate. The latter is decorated with six tassels, three
above and three below, and below it is seen the plain apron (_maxtli_),
which descends almost to the sandals. The shoulders are covered with
caps or epaulets reaching just below the armpits; on the forearms are
bracelets, fastened with loops on the inner side, and on the feet
sandals, held in place by vertical heelpieces and thongs, and decorated
with large flaps, which almost cover the dorsum of each foot. Attached
to the incense burner, and forming a background for the figure, are
projecting feather ornaments extending from the headdress to the elbow.

The mound was dug away to the ground level. It was found to be built of
blocks of limestone and earth, but nothing of moment was found in it
with the exception of numerous potsherds of all kinds.


MOUND NO. 25

  [Illustration: FIG. 68.--Incense burner decorated with crude clay
                           figurine from Mound No. 25.]

Mound No. 25 was situated in the country of the Icaichè Indians,
Quintana Roo, Yucatan. The mound was discovered by the Indians when
cutting down virgin bush to make a milpa, or corn plantation. It was
a moderate-sized mound, about 10 feet high, and upon its summit,
uncovered, lay the objects illustrated in figures 68, 69, and 70.
Figure 68 exhibits a roughly formed clay figurine, nearly 1 foot in
height, decorating a small hourglass-shaped incense burner. Both
figure and vase are very crudely modeled in rough pottery; most of the
prominent characteristics of the carefully modeled and elaborately
decorated incense burner represented in plate 20 and figure 67 are
still retained. The large round ear plugs, with long flaps from the
headdress overlapping them, the horizontally striated breastplate, and
even a rudimentary _maxtli_, together with the extended position of the
arms, as if in the act of making an offering, and the background of
featherwork are features which may be recognized. There is exhibited,
however, a lamentable decadence from the art which fabricated the more
elaborate vase. In figure 69 may be seen what probably represents a
further stage of degeneration--namely, the substitution of the head
for the entire figure on the outside of the incense burner. The last
stage of all in the decadence of this branch of Maya art is to be seen
in the small crude bowls found by Sapper in the great Christa of the
settlement of Izan, and by Charnay in the ruins of Menche Tinamit.[49]

  [Illustration: FIG. 69.--Crude clay figurine found in Mound No. 25.]

These bowls, each decorated with a roughly modeled human face, are
manufactured by the modern Indians and used by them in burning copal
gum in the ruins of the temples erected by their ancestors. Figure 70
shows a life-sized hollow head, in rough pottery, with a thin hollow
neck, probably used to carry around in processions on the top of a
long pole. There can be no doubt that these bowls and hourglass-shaped
vessels, each decorated externally with a human figure or face, usually
that of a god, were used as incense burners, since a number of them, as
already stated, were found in a mound at Santa Rita with half burnt out
incense still contained in them. Moreover, their use for this purpose
persists to the present day among the Lacandones[50] and even among the
Santa Cruz Indians. These incense burners occur most frequently in the
central part of the Maya area and are not common in northern Yucatan
or southern Guatemala. Three distinct types are found: The first
include the large, well-modeled specimens found in and around burial
mounds, decorated with the complete figure of the god (usually Cuculcan
or Itzamna), having every detail in clothing and ornament carefully
executed in high relief. These are all probably pre-Columbian, and such
as have been found seem to have been used only as ceremonial mortuary
incense burners, to be broken into fragments (which were scattered
through or over the burial mound) immediately after use.

The specimen shown in plate 20 and figure 67 is a typical example of
this class.

Incense burners of the second type are smaller, cruder, and probably
later in date than those of the first type. Some of these are decorated
with the entire figure, but more of them with the face only of the god.

Villagutierre tells us that the Indians of this region as late as the
end of the seventeenth century still practiced to some extent the rites
of their ancient religion;[51] and in the voyages which he describes
up the Rio Hondo, and to Tipu, the Spaniards must frequently have come
in contact with the ancestors of the present Santa Cruz and Icaichè
Indians, from whose territory the specimens shown in figures 68 and
69, typical examples of this class, were taken. During the early
years of the Spanish occupancy it is probable that the Indians, even
in this remote and little visited region, living in a constant state
of semiwarfare and rebellion, robbed, enslaved, driven from their
villages, with little time to cultivate their milpas, gradually lost
their ancient traditions and arts, and, long neglecting, ultimately
almost entirely forgot, the elaborate ritual connected with their
former religion. Such a decadence may be observed in comparing the
incense burners illustrated in plate 20 and figure 68. The very marked
facial characteristics of the former have given place to the crudely
modeled, vacuous face of the latter, resembling the work of a child;
while the elaborate dress and ornament, each minutest part of which
probably had a special significance and symbolism, though retaining
to some extent the form of their main constituents--the headdress,
breastplate, _maxtli_, and sandals--have almost completely lost the
wealth of detail which gave them significance.

  [Illustration: FIG. 70.--Crude clay figurine found in Mound No. 25.]

Incense burners of the third type are decorated with a very crude
representation of the face only of the god, consisting in some cases
merely of slits for the eyes and mouth, with a conical projection for
the nose, on the outer surface of the vessel. Some of the faces are
represented conventionally by two ears, with ear plugs, one on each side
of the vessel, or by knobs of clay on its outer edge, which represent
the hair. Lastly, the incense burner, which may be recognized by its
hourglass shape, may be quite plain and undecorated.

The third type is probably the latest in point of time;[52] this
includes the crude face-decorated bowls still used by the modern
Lacandones,[53] among whom the ritual, as is so frequently the case,
seems to have survived almost in its entirety the faith which gave birth
to it. This is the more readily comprehensible when we remember that the
manufacture and use of these ceremonial incense burners was practiced
commonly by all classes of the people, not having been restricted, like
most other details of the Maya ritual, solely to the priests.

  [Illustration: FIG. 71.--Small pottery vases found in Mound No. 26.]


MOUND NO. 26

Mound No. 26 was situated in a clearing about 7 miles to the south of
Corozal, in the northern part of British Honduras. There were about 20
mounds, irregularly grouped, in this clearing, varying from 6 to 12
feet in height and from 50 to 120 feet in circumference. The mound was
8 feet high by 80 feet in circumference. It was built of rough blocks
of limestone, limestone dust, and earth, tightly packed together,
forming a tough, resistant mass. The mound was completely removed
to the ground level, but nothing of interest except chips of flint,
fragments of obsidian knives, and potsherds was found till the ground
level was reached. Lying upon this, near the center of the mound, were
found the two small vases represented in figure 71, _a_, _b_. Each
is about 6 inches in diameter; the one marked _a_ is of polished red
pottery, nearly globular in shape; _b_ is of dark chocolate-colored
pottery, also finely polished. There was a space of about 4 feet
between the two vessels, in which were found fragments of human bones.


MOUND NO. 27

Mound No. 27 was situated within 100 yards of the next preceding,
compared with which it was slightly smaller. It was built of blocks
of limestone, limestone dust, and earth. No remains were found in the
mound till the ground level was reached. Resting on this, about the
center of the mound, lay a small vase (fig. 72), 8 inches in height, of
rough red pottery. Close to this were a few fragments of human bones
and some teeth. This mound contained nothing else of interest.

  [Illustration: FIG. 72. Red pottery vase found in Mound No. 27.]


MOUND NO. 28

Mound No. 28 was situated close to Nos. 26 and 27, and was built of
similar material. It was 6 feet high by 120 feet in circumference.
On the ground level about the center of the mound lay a circular,
flat-bottomed bowl 8 inches in diameter, painted a dark chocolate color
and polished. A hole had been bored in its bottom and the bowl itself
was broken into three pieces. With it was an irregularly shaped piece
of flint about 5 inches in length, into which nearly 20 circular holes
had been bored. It would appear that this piece of flint had been used
to test the merits of various boring implements, as some of the holes
were shallow depressions, while others were half an inch deep. Most of
them were mere circular depressions of varying diameters, with a smooth
flat bottom, and had evidently been made with a solid cylindrical
borer, others, however, had a solid core projecting from their bottom,
and appeared to have been bored with a hollow cylinder; while a third
variety had a small indentation at the summit of this central core.
No further excavation was done in this group of mounds, as they all
appeared to be sepulchral, belonging to persons of the poorer class,
hence it was considered very improbable that objects of interest would
be found in them.

  [Illustration: PLATE 21
                 a. SMALL VASE DECORATED WITH HUMAN HEAD
                 b. HUMAN BONES FROM MOUND NO. 29]


MOUND NO. 29

Mound No. 29, situated close to the seashore, near Corozal, was of
unusual construction, being built throughout of marl dust. It was a
low, flat mound, 2 feet in height by 25 feet in diameter. Nothing
of human origin was found in it with the exception of a few rough
potsherds. On reaching the ground level two circular well-like holes,
2 feet in diameter, were discovered, about 15 feet apart. At the top
both openings were covered with large blocks of limestone, on removing
which it was found that each hole was filled with marl dust, enclosing
in both cases a single male human skeleton. The knees had been forcibly
flexed on the thighs, and the thighs on the pelvis, while the back
had been bent till the head, which rested on the folded arms, almost
touched the symphysis pubis. Evidently the body had been doubled up
at the time of burial, so as to fit tightly into the cavity, and had
been further compressed by ramming down large stones on top of the
marl dust with which it was surrounded.[54] The bones in one of the
graves were in an excellent state of preservation, as may be seen from
plate 21, _b_; they are those of a young adult male, probably somewhat
more than 5 feet in height, of poor muscular development. The teeth
are excellent; the skull is decidedly brachicephalic, the measurements
being: Length, 15.4 cm.; breadth, 17.5 cm.; circumference, 52 cm.;
cephalic index, 113. Beneath this skeleton were found an unfinished
flint arrowhead, four fragments of small obsidian knives, and the
broken fragments of a small, round, unpolished chocolate-colored bowl.

The bones in the other cist, though placed apparently under precisely
the same conditions as the one first opened, were found to be so
friable that they crumbled into fragments when an effort was made to
remove them. Beneath them were found only fragments of obsidian knives.


MOUND NO. 30

Mound No. 30, situated close to Corozal, was completely dug down,
and was found to contain multiple burials. The mound was 8 feet in
height, roughly circular, and 40 feet in diameter. It was capped by a
layer of reddish-brown earth, 6 inches to 1 foot in thickness, beneath
which were alternate layers of soft cement, each about 1 foot thick,
and of small limestone rubble about 2 feet thick. Scattered over the
surface of the mound, just beneath the earth capping, were found a
number of fragments of clay figurines. The best preserved of these
were three human faces, an arm with the hand holding a small bird, a
bird's head, an alligator's head, and a plaited cotton breastplate. At
depths varying from 2 to 3 feet, six interments were found; of these
only a few fragments of the skull and long bones remained, not enough
to determine even the position in which the corpse had been placed at
burial. With the bones, in some cases close to them, in others at some
little distance, the following objects were discovered: One rubbing
stone (for grinding corn), 2 pear-shaped flints, 9 flint hammerstones,
1 ax head, 1 flint scraper, 1 broken hone of slate, 1 flint spearhead,
2 fossil shells, 2 pieces of brick-like pottery, 1 pottery disk, 3
small beads, and 1 shell.

On reaching the ground level of hard compact earth, it was found that
an oblong trench had been cut through the latter down to the limestone
rock beneath, 3 feet in breadth, and varying from 2 to 4 feet in
depth; this trench had been filled in with small rubble. In its inner
wall, at the north side of the quadrangle, three interments had been
made by scooping out small cists in the earth, depositing the remains
therein, and filling in with limestone dust and rubble. With one of
these burials was found a small three-legged pot, of rough, unpolished
pottery; with another, a vessel in the form of a quadruped, 7 inches
in length, the identity of which is difficult to determine; and with
the third a small saucer-shaped vessel of red ware, and a nearly
spherical vessel of dark polished red ware. Within the latter were
discovered a few small animal bones, some freshwater snail shells (as
are found at the present day in the neighboring swamps and eaten by the
Indians), and a few bivalve shells. It seems probable that this vessel
contained food, either as an offering to the gods or for the use of the
deceased in his passage to the next world. It is not uncommon to find
considerable accumulations of the shells of conchs, cockles, snails,
and other edible shellfish, with the bones and teeth of deer, tiger,
gibnut, snake, and (along the seashore) manatee, in British Honduras
mounds; but the remains of food offerings contained within a vessel are
of rare occurrence.[55]

A number of these large flat mounds containing multiple burials have
been from time to time completely dug down near Corozal, in order to
obtain stone for repairing the streets. Beneath nearly all of them were
found trenches cut through the earth down to the subjacent limestone.
These trenches varied from 2 to 5 feet in breadth; in the case of
the smaller mounds they formed a parallelogram, a triangle, or even
a single straight line; in the larger mounds two parallelograms were
joined by parallel trenches (see fig. 23). They were invariably filled
with small rubble, and a few of them contained interments in their
walls. The purpose of these trenches is difficult to surmise, as they
could hardly have served as foundations; drainage was unnecessary;
and, while the trenches themselves were never employed for sepulchral
purposes, it is only occasionally that a few burials are found within
cists excavated in the earth along their margins.

Three kinds of burial seem to have been commonly employed among the
ancient inhabitants of this part of the Maya area. The poorest class
were buried in large flat mounds, some of them a half an acre in extent
and containing as many as 40 to 50 interments. The body was usually
buried with the feet drawn under the pelvis, the knees flexed on the
abdomen, the arms crossed over the chest, and the face pressed down on
the knees; the position, in fact, in which it would occupy the smallest
possible space. With the remains are usually found a few objects of the
roughest workmanship, as flint hammerstones, scrapers, and spearheads,
pottery or shell beads, stone metates and henequen scrapers, small
obsidian knives and cores, and unglazed, rough pottery vessels. In the
second class of burials, each individual has a mound, varying from 2
to 30 feet in height, to himself. Several mounds of this class have
already been described from the neighborhood of Corozal. The objects
found with interments of this class are usually more numerous and of
better workmanship than those found in the multiple burial mounds,
though they do not show much greater variety. The position of the
skeleton, where it has been possible to ascertain this, is usually the
same as in the multiple burial mounds; occasionally, however, it is
found in the prone position, and, in rare instances, buried head down.
The third mode of burial was probably reserved for priests, caciques,
and other important individuals. The interment took place in a stone
cist or chamber, within a large mound, varying from 20 to 50 feet in
height. The skeleton is found in the prone position, surrounded by
well painted and decorated vases, together with beautiful greenstone,
shell, obsidian, and mother-of-pearl beads, gorgets, studs, ear plugs,
and other ornaments.[56] Some of these mounds contain two or even three
chambers or cists, superimposed one upon the other. The skeleton is
then usually found in the top cist, the accompanying objects being
placed in the lower ones. In one instance partial cremation seemed to
have been practiced, as fragments of half-burned human bones were found
in a largo pottery urn.


MOUND NO. 31

Mound No. 31 was situated close to the Rio Nuevo, about 16 miles from
its mouth, in the northern part of British Honduras. It was a somewhat
flattened mound, 15 feet in height, built of blocks of limestone,
limestone dust, and earth. At a depth of 9 feet, the angle of a ruined
building, formed by two walls averaging 2 feet high, intersecting at
right angles, and built of squared blocks of limestone, was brought
to light. The walls enclosed part of a floor of smooth, hard cement.
Numbers of blocks of squared stone were found throughout the upper
part of the mound, which had evidently at one time formed part of the
ruined building. Resting on the cement floor, close to the wall, were
found nine pottery vessels, covered with limestone dust. Five of these
were of the type shown in figure 73, _a_, of dark-red, rather coarse
pottery, 12 inches in diameter at the rim. One, pictured in figure 74,
is the usual Maya chocolate pot, similar to the one already described
(see fig. 24, _g_), except that the spout, instead of bending inward
toward the vessel, passes directly upward parallel to its perpendicular
axis, an arrangement which must have rendered it far easier to drink
from the vessel or pour fluid out of it. The three other vessels found
are illustrated in figures 73, _b_, _c_, and _d_; _b_ is of polished
chocolate-brown pottery, 3 inches in diameter by 5 inches in height;
_c_ is of thick red pottery, 3 inches high, with two small handles
for suspension, one on each side; _d_ is of coarse polished red ware,
unusually thick and clumsy, 12 inches high by 8 inches in diameter.
Each of these vessels contained a single small polished greenstone
bead. No other objects were found associated with them, and there was
no trace of human bones. Excavations were made in this mound to the
ground level without results. The lower part of the mound was built
of large blocks of limestone and rubble, held loosely together with
friable mortar.

  [Illustration: FIG. 73.--Pottery vessels found in Mound No. 31.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 74.--Chocolate pot found in Mound No. 31.]


MOUND NO. 32

  [Illustration: FIG. 75.--Pottery vessels found in Mound No. 32.]

Mound No. 32 was situated quite close to No. 31, which it very closely
resembled in both size and construction. At a depth of 9 feet the
end of a small building constructed of squared blocks of limestone
was brought to light. The walls were still standing to a height of 2
to 3 feet, and showed traces of a red stucco covering on their inner
surfaces. The cement floor of the building and the platform upon
which it stood could also be traced. Lying upon this floor were five
pottery vessels and an unfinished flint celt. Two of these vessels were
precisely similar to that shown in figure 73, _a_; one is a large,
circular, shallow plaque, of rather thick reddish-brown pottery, in
the center of which a small hole has been made, evidently with the
object of rendering the plaque useless. The last two vessels are
illustrated in figure 75, _a_, _b_. _A_ is an unusually large vessel
of very coarse, thick, red pottery, 18 inches high, which had probably
been used to contain corn or some such dry material, as the pottery
was too friable and soft for a cooking pot, or even to hold water.
_B_ is a small three-legged vase, 4 inches high, of coarse, unpainted
pottery. Each of these five vessels, with the exception of the plaque,
contained a single polished greenstone bead. The celt was roughly
blocked out of yellowish flint. No objects except those above described
were found with these vessels, nor were there any traces of human
burial. Excavations were made in the mound to the ground level, and it
was found to be composed below the platform upon which the building
stood of a solid mass of rubble and limestone held together by loose,
friable mortar. There are numerous groups of mounds of all sizes in
the neighborhood, and judging by these, and by the potsherds and flint
and obsidian chips which one finds strewn over the surface of the soil
in great profusion, it must have been a densely populated region at
one time. The two life-size human heads shown in figures 76 and 77
were found close to these two mounds in digging a posthole. Figure
76 represents a grotesque head cut from a solid block of crystalline
limestone. Figure 77 is a mask, rather crudely cut from greenstone and
unpolished. Both were buried in the marl and were unaccompanied by
other objects.

  [Illustration: FIG. 76.--Head cut from limestone found in Mound
                           No. 32.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 77.--Greenstone mask found in Mound No. 32.]


MOUND NO. 33

Mound No. 33 was situated near Bacalar, in the Province of Quintana
Roo, Mexico. It was 6 feet in height by 20 feet in diameter, and
was built of blocks of limestone, limestone dust, and earth. Near
the summit of this mound, close to the surface, was found the small
soapstone lamp illustrated in figure 78, 4-3/4 inches in length by
1-3/4 inches in depth. The lamp is decorated in front with a floral
design, and at the back by wing or feather-like ornaments, possibly
meant to represent the tail and half-folded wings of a bird. It is
finely polished throughout but had probably never been used, as in
hollowing out the interior the maker had carried one of his strokes too
close to the surface, making a small hole, which would have allowed the
oil to escape. There is a freedom and lack of conventionality, both
in the pleasing and natural floral design and in the flowing lines
of the back part of this little lamp, which are totally unlike the
cramped and highly conventional style to be observed in similar small
objects of ancient Maya manufacture. So widely does it differ from Maya
standards that there can be but little doubt that it was introduced in
post-Columbian days, probably very soon after the conquest, especially
as in the same mound was found one of the small painted clay figurines
so common in mounds in this neighborhood, which with the censers
probably belonged to the latest period of Maya culture.

  [Illustration: PLATE 22
                 PAINTED CLAY FIGURINE FROM MOUND NO. 33]

Another explanation which suggests itself is that the lamp was buried
in the mound at a much later date (possibly during the troublous times
of the Indian rebellions, between 1840 and 1850) by someone who wished
to hide it temporarily, and that it had no connection with the original
purpose of the mound. No other objects were found in this mound, with
the exception of a number of potsherds, till the ground level was
reached, where, near the center of the mound, the painted clay figurine
shown in plate 22 was uncovered. This represents a deer with a human
head, whose headdress is the upper jaw of some mythological animal.
The back of the figure, which is hollow, contains a small opening near
the tail, covered with a conical plug of clay. Within were two small
beads, one of polished red shell, the other of polished greenstone. The
whole figurine had been coated with lime wash, over which were painted
black lines, dots, and circles.[57] The human face, earrings, gorget,
and part of the headdress are painted blue, while the mouth of both
the human face and the face in the headdress are painted red. Near the
figurine lay a vessel (fig. 79) of rough yellow pottery, unpainted and
undecorated, with two small ear-like projections just below the rim. No
bones and no trace of human burial were found in the mound.

  [Illustration: FIG. 78.--Soapstone lamp found in Mound No. 33.]


MOUND NO. 34

  [Illustration: FIG. 79.--Rough pottery vessel found in Mound No. 33.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 80.--Objects found in Mound No. 34.]

Mound No. 34, situated near Progreso, in the northern district of
British Honduras, was 5 feet in height, roughly circular, and about
20 feet in diameter at the base. The mound was built throughout of
rough blocks of limestone, rubble, and earth. At the ground level,
about the center of the mound, were found large flat unworked flags,
which seemed to have formed the roof of a small cist that had caved
in. Beneath these were found a few fragments of bone, which crumbled
away as they were being removed, with a small spherical vase of rough
unpainted pottery, 1-1/2 inches in diameter (pl. 21, _a_). This was
decorated on the outside with a human head wearing a peaked headdress,
somewhat resembling the cap of liberty, and large circular ear plugs
in the ears. Below the head projected a pair of arms with the hands
clasped in front, supporting between them a small pottery ball. Within
this little vase, which was filled with earth and limestone dust,
were found: (a) A small earthenware bead (fig. 80, _a_). (b) A small,
very delicate obsidian knife, the tip of which is broken off, but
which otherwise shows hardly any signs of use (fig. 80, _b_). (c) The
terminal phalanx of a small and delicate finger, in a very fair state
of preservation (fig. 80, _c_). The burial of a terminal phalanx of
one of the fingers of the mother, with a favorite child, is not an
unknown custom among semicivilized peoples, and it is possible that
this little mound contains such an interment. The bones of the child
being fragile and deficient in calcareous matter, may well have almost
disappeared, while the finger bone of the mother, being of more compact
bony tissue, and protected to some extent by the vase in which it lay,
has been preserved. The crudeness of the modeling of the little vase
and of the face and arms thereon would suggest that it may have been
a plaything of the child during life, and even perhaps may have been
modeled by its own hands. The obsidian knife may have been used by
the mother to separate the bone at the last finger joint. The little
figure which decorates the outside of this vase closely resembles
those curious figures in a diving position, with arms pointed downward
and feet upward, which are not uncommon in this area. Figure 81 shows
one represented on the outside of a small vase; several are to be
found, molded in stucco, on the ruined buildings of Tuluum, on the
eastern coast of Yucatan, just below the island of Cozumel, and they
are occasionally, though rarely, found decorating pottery incense
burners, instead of the commoner representations of the Gods Itzamna
and Cuculcan. Neither Landa, Villagutierre, nor Cogolludo mention the
custom as practiced by Maya mothers or relatives on the deaths of their
children. Had it been prevalent at the time of the conquest it seems
hardly possible that such a practice could have escaped their notice;
on the other hand, if the solitary phalanx had not been buried with
the dead as a memorial, its presence under these circumstances is very
difficult to explain.

In nearly all extensive groups of mounds one or more middens, or refuse
mounds, are to be found. The four mounds next described, though varying
much from one another, are all distinctly of this type.

  [Illustration: FIG. 81.--Figure in diving position on small vase.]


MOUND NO. 35

Mound No. 35 was situated near the Cayo, on the Mopan River; it forms
one of a group of about 30 mounds scattered over a considerable
area. It was 12 feet in height and seemingly had been about 30 feet
in diameter, but situated as it was, immediately on the river bank,
nearly half of it had been washed away by the floods of successive
rainy seasons, leaving a clean section almost through the center of the
mound, very favorable for observing its construction. The lowest layer,
1 to 2 inches in thickness, resting on the ground level, was composed
of ashes mixed with fragments of charcoal; above this was a layer of
earth and stones about 1 foot in thickness, and above this a further
layer of ashes; and so on to the top of the mound--strata of ashes
averaging 2 inches thick alternating with strata of earth averaging
about 1 foot. No objects with the exception of a few potsherds were
found in the earth layers, but the layers of ashes were rich in flint
and obsidian chips, fragments of conch and snail shells, clay beads and
malacates, potsherds in great variety and abundance, with the bones
of the deer, gibnut, and peccary. It would seem that this mound had
formed a sort of kitchen midden; that when a certain amount of refuse
had been deposited it was covered with a layer of earth, and that the
mound must have been in use for a considerable time to have reached its
present height.

Small mounds containing considerable quantities of ashes and charcoal
mixed with earth and stones, together with refuse material, as flint
and obsidian chips, broken implements, potsherds, bones, shells,
clay beads and malacates, and similar indestructible objects, are
not of infrequent occurrence, and probably mark the sites of ancient
kitchen middens. Two such mounds were found on the mainland, south of
the island of Tamalcab, in Chetumal Bay, Yucatan, situated in what
seemingly had been a village site, occupying an area of approximately
20 acres. Great numbers of potsherds, fragments of pottery, images,
beads, malacates, chips and broken implements of stone and obsidian,
broken metates, fragments of conch and cockle shells, stone water
troughs, and other indestructible rubbish were found scattered in great
profusion over the whole of this site.


MOUND NO. 36

Mound No. 36 was situated at Sarteneja, in the northern district of
British Honduras, quite close to the seashore. This mound was 2 feet 6
inches in height, about 12 feet in diameter; it was composed throughout
of conch shells mingled with cockle and whelklike shells. Nothing
except the shells was found in this mound, which forms one of a group
of similar mounds, evidently dumping places used by each house, for the
disposal of the shells of shellfish brought in from the reef by the
fishermen after the fish had been extracted and eaten.


MOUND NO. 37

Mound No. 37, situated close to the next preceding mound on the
seashore, at Sarteneja, is about 2 feet high by 12 to 15 feet in
diameter. It is composed almost entirely of fragments of rather rough
unpainted pottery and seemingly marks the site of a manufactory of this
class of ware, as great quantities of fragments are also to be found
scattered in all directions around the mound. A small quantity of earth
was mingled with the potsherds, but nothing else was found in the mound.


MOUND NO. 38

Mound No. 38, situated about 5 miles from Corozal, in the northern
district of British Honduras, was 6 feet in height by 15 feet in
diameter, with a flattened top. It was covered with a layer of humus
and contained nothing but fragments of weathered stone, of sizes
varying from small rubble to blocks weighing 30 to 40 pounds. Similar
mounds are found elsewhere and are apparently merely heaps of stones,
which have been picked up on the surface of the fields, as, unlike
other mounds, they contain no clay, limestone, or marl dust, mortar, or
other binding material and no trace of burials or any object of human
construction.

  [Illustration: FIG. 82.--Design incised on femur of deer found in
                           Mound No. 39.]


MOUND NO. 39

Mound No. 39 was situated on Wild Cane Cay, a small island off the
southern coast of British Honduras. The island seems to have been built
up with stone and other material brought from the mainland and to
have been used as a burial place. Several small mounds are scattered
over the face of the island; unfortunately most of them had been dug
down for the sake of the stone they contained and the objects from
the graves lost or given away. Those which could be traced consisted
chiefly of copper ornaments, as rings, gorgets, and studs. Mound No.
39, the only one whose contents were ascertained with any degree of
accuracy, was a small circular mound 10 feet high, built of sand and
blocks of reef stone; near the ground level, about the center of the
mound, a single human interment was found, the bones of which were
in an advanced state of decay; mingled with these were: (a) A round
red earthenware pot, containing a few small circular beads made from
conch shell and five or six medium-sized, unused obsidian knives. (b)
A second somewhat larger pot, of the same shape and material, which
contained the upper part of the femur of a deer, on which is incised
the design shown in figure 82. This is neatly executed in shallow
lines; the upper part evidently represents a tiger, or the skin of
that animal, and is separated by a platted design from the lower,
which may be intended as a representation of the God Itzamna. With
the bone were two objects of copper, one a finger ring constructed of
thin flat bands two-fifths inch apart, joined by double scrolls; this
is very much worn, either from use or from oxidization, consequent on
long exposure in the damp soil. The second copper object (fig. 83) was
probably used as a gorget, or for attachment to a headdress, as at
the back is seen a cruciform grille, evidently intended to hold it in
place. This object is in the form of a human face, the lower part with
its large mouth, thick prominent lips, and flattened nose, exhibiting
marked negroid characteristics, which the upper part with its bulging
prominent forehead contradicts. The headdress is ornamented with three
spikes passing along the sagittal suture from front to back, while
under the chin is a projection probably intended to represent a short
beard. The ring and ornament are both strongly suggestive of Spanish
influence, as the face with its thick lips, flattened nose, and bulging
forehead is totally unlike any type with which the Maya were likely to
come in contact, unless, indeed, it were the Carib, who even at this
early date had possibly formed small settlements as far north as the
southern coast of British Honduras. If the objects were of Spanish
origin they were probably obtained from some Spanish settlement farther
north, possibly Bakhalal, as there was no settlement between that town
and the coast of Guatemala till many years after the conquest. That
the cult of Itzamna was still flourishing is shown by the effigy of
the god incised on the deer bone, and according to Villagutierre, the
Indians of this neighborhood up to the end of the seventeenth century
were closely allied to the Itzaex,[58] who still freely practiced their
ancient religious rites.

  [Illustration: FIG. 83.--Copper object found in Mound No. 39.]


MOUND NO. 40

Mound No. 40, situated near Pueblo Nuevo, on the Rio Hondo, consisted
of a ridge about 10 feet high by 40 feet in length. On the summit of
the ridge near its center, covered only by a layer of humus, was found
a small rough three-legged vase 3 inches high, containing a single
long, polished, greenstone bead. The upper part of the ridge was
found to consist of blocks of limestone, limestone dust, and rubble,
on removing which to a depth of about 4 feet the ruins of a building
were brought to light (fig. 84). The bones were in so poor a state of
preservation that it was difficult to determine the exact position in
which the body had been placed at the time of burial; it had, however,
certainly been fully extended.

Close to the head were found fragments of three round bowls, all
precisely similar in both size and coloring. Each was of the shape
shown in figure 71, _b_, 3-1/2 inches high by 6-1/2 inches in diameter,
and was made of rather fine ash-colored pottery, finely polished. Each
of these bowls before burial had the bottom knocked out. The mound
beneath the building was composed of blocks of limestone, rubble, and
limestone dust, forming a tough, solid, compact mass. This would seem
to have been a small private house, not a temple, which (probably on
account of the death of its owner) had been deliberately wrecked, and
the owner's body buried beneath the cement floor of the one chamber
remaining partially intact. Fresh cement seems to have been applied
over the grave before the greater part of the house was pulled down and
the wreckage piled up, to form a capping to the mound upon which the
house stood.

  [Illustration: FIG. 84.--Ruins found in Mound No. 40. These consisted
                           of broken-down walls about 2 feet high,
                           joining each other at right angles.
                           Of the wall _A-B_, 10 feet remained standing;
                           of the wall _B-C_, 8 feet. The shaded space
                           included between the walls was covered with
                           hard smooth cement, which had been broken
                           away to a rough edge at its outer border
                           and was continuous at its inner border with
                           the stucco which was still partly adherent
                           to the walls. The walls themselves were built
                           of blocks of limestone (squared on their
                           outer surfaces but rough within), rubble,
                           and mortar; they were nearly 2 feet thick.
                           The long diameter of the ridge pointed
                           almost due east and west. An excavation was
                           made in the cement floor, and at the depth
                           of 18 inches, at the point marked _D_, a
                           single interment was brought to light.]


MOUND NO. 41

Mound No. 41 was situated in the northern district of British Honduras,
about 9 miles from Corozal. It consisted of a circular wall or rampart
varying from 4 to 10 feet in height, inclosing a space 30 yards in
diameter. The wall was built of earth and blocks of limestone, and in
places had become considerably flattened out from the action of the
heavy tropical rains of this region. To the north an opening or gap
existed about 10 yards across. Excavations were made in the encircling
wall of the inclosure, and also in the central space, but nothing
except fragments of pottery was discovered.

Mounds of this kind are found throughout the area, though not in
great numbers. Some of these are circular or horseshoe shaped, some
crescentic, and others curved or even straight ridges. As a rule they
contain nothing except a few potsherds, which would naturally be picked
up with the earth of which most of them are made; in some, however
(especially in the straight ridges), superficial interments have been
found. These mounds were probably used as fortifications, the circular,
horseshoe-shaped, and crescentic mounds being particularly well adapted
to this purpose.

At Yalloch, just across the Guatemala boundary line from Choro, a
small village in the western district of British Honduras, the Alcalde
made a remarkable discovery a few years ago. While hunting for a
gibnut he traced one to a hole in the ground; on poking a stick into
this hole, he was astonished on withdrawing it to find that he had
brought out on its end a small painted pottery cylinder. The hole on
being enlarged proved to be the entrance to a _chultun_, one of those
curious underground chambers cut in the limestone rock found throughout
Yucatan and the northern part of British Honduras, especially in the
neighborhood of ruins. This _chultun_ contained numbers of fragments
of very finely painted and decorated pottery vases, together with two
complete cylindrical vases, an ovoid vase, and a pottery cylinder
without bottom. Some of these were within the _chultun_, some in a
pit sunk in its floor, from which at a later date several pieces of
beautifully decorated pottery were taken. The pit had evidently been
used as a burial place, in which the memorial pottery was deposited
with the body. Merwin found similar painted Maya vases some years later
in a chamber covered by a mound, at Holmul, within a few miles of
Yalloch, and at Platon, on the Mopan River, a sepulchral _chultun_ was
cleared out in which human bones still remained. (Pls. 23-28.)

Near the point where Blue Creek or Rio Azul joins the Rio Hondo, in the
northern district of British Honduras, is situated in the bush about
100 yards from the latter river a small circular lagoon, of a deep
blue color and considerable depth; from this flows a narrow stream,
also deep blue in color and highly impregnated with copper, which
opens into the main river just below the mouth of the Rio Azul. The
little lake is bounded on its eastern side by an almost perpendicular
cliff of limestone, in which are several small caves and one large
cave. The interior of one of the smallest of these caverns, situated
near the base of the cliff, not more than a few yards in depth, was
roughly hewn out so as to form shelves. Upon these were found several
hundred small binequins of incense, varying in size from 3 to 4 inches
in length by 1-1/2 to 2 inches in breadth, to 8 to 10 inches in length
by 3 to 4 inches in breadth. The incense was composed of the gum of
the white acacia mixed with various aromatic substances; when burned
it gave off a very pleasant odor. The gum had evidently been poured
while in a liquid state into small bags, made of palm leaves, as in
some of the binequins considerable fragments of the palm leaves were
still adherent to the copal, and in all, casts of the leaves were left
on the soft surface of the gum before it solidified. The binequins
which the present-day Maya Indians manufacture as receptacles for
their homemade lime, though vastly larger, are precisely similar in
shape, construction, and appearance to those their ancestors used
as receptacles for copal. The entrance to the large cave was near
the summit of the cliff and so difficult to reach that it can never
have been long used as a place of residence, though it would form an
exceedingly strong position to hold against an attack from without, as
it is necessary to cross a fallen tree trunk in order to enter, and
this might easily be hauled back into the cave or pushed away from
its mouth, leaving it practically inaccessible. Nothing was found in
the cave except a large quantity of bats' excrement and of rough red
potsherds.




TWO PAINTED STUCCO FACES FROM UXMAL


Two human faces molded in stucco and painted were discovered in a small
stone-lined chamber situated beneath one of the end rooms of the Casa
del Gobernador in the ruins of Uxmal, northern Yucatan. The room was
accidentally disclosed by the caving in of a small part of its roof.
One of its walls was covered, above a stone cornice, by a frieze of
hieroglyphs, and against this wall stood a small square stone altar,
each side of which had been decorated with a human figure molded in
stucco and painted. Unfortunately these figures had fallen: the two
heads here described are the best preserved parts of them which remain.
Describing the sculpture in stone which adorns the outside of the Casa
del Gobernador, Stevens ventures the opinion that some of the heads
were portraits of celebrated men of the period.

The discovery of this chamber is extremely interesting, as it opens up
the possibility that many, if not all, of these vast substructures,
built apparently of solid stone, which throughout Yucatan support more
or less ruined buildings, may in fact be honeycombed with chambers.
Stevens first suggests the possibility of this. Unfortunately since
Stevens's day little or nothing has been done throughout Yucatan in the
way of excavation to verify the truth of his surmise.

Of the two heads now described, one probably represents a male, the
other a female; there is, moreover, a marked individuality about each
of them which renders it extremely probable that they are portraits,
possibly of some "Halach Uinic" (real man, or chief) of Uxmal and his
wife, during the palmy days of the triple alliance.

Each face is painted black with white circles round the orbital margin,
red rims to the eyes, and brick-red oval patches at either angle of
the mouth. The center of each upper lip is decorated by a figure 8
shaped labret, the lower portion of which has been broken away in
the male head. Over the bridge of each nose is a curious ornament
consisting of a small oblong object with rounded corners, held in
place by a loop passing down the median line of the bridge. Over the
center of the forehead in both faces hangs a pendant, that of the male
composed of four small round beads, that of the female appearing as a
rounded comblike excrescence. Traces of the headdresses remain as a
few feathers above each forehead. Both heads were probably held within
widely distended animal jaws, as a part of the lower jaw is seen below
the chin in the male head, where also the large circular red ear plug
still remains on the right side. The measurements of the faces are as
follows:

_Male._--Top of headdress to bottom of lower jaw of animal head holding
the face, 11-3/10 inches; top of headdress to bottom of chin, 9-3/10
inches; forehead below headdress, to bottom of chin, 8-3/10 inches;
extreme breadth of face (midway between a transverse line passing
through the pupils and one passing immediately beneath the lower margin
of the nasal septum), 7-1/10 inches; extreme breadth at level of the
pupils, 7 inches; length of nose, 2-6/10 inches; breadth of nose,
1-6/10 inches.

_Female._--Top of headdress to bottom of chin, 10-4/10 inches; forehead
below headdress to bottom of chin, 8-8/10 inches; greatest breadth of
face, at same level as the male, 7-8/10 inches; greatest breadth at the
level of eyes, 7-6/10 inches; length of nose, 2-8/10 inches; breadth of
nose, 1-9/10 inches.

The city of Uxmal belongs to the later, or northern Maya, civilization.
Unlike the earlier southern cities, Uxmal is without a single initial
series date by which its age might be approximately determined. It
was founded by Achuitok Tutulxu, probably about the year 1000 of the
Christian era. In the "Series of Katuns from the Book of Chilam Balam
of Mani" the date given is Katun 2 Ahau, whereas in that from Tizimin
it is recorded as having taken place 180 years later.[60] The cities
of Uxmal, Chichen Itza, and Mayapan formed a triple alliance, which
lasted for nearly 200 years, during probably the most prosperous
period of the whole Maya rule in Yucatan. After the disruption of
this alliance, caused by a quarrel between the rulers of Chichen Itza
and Mayapan, Uxmal gradually declined in prosperity, till at the time
of the conquest its temples and palaces seem to have been completely
abandoned. The city was visited in 1586 by the Franciscan delegate
Alonzo Ponce, one of whose companions gives an interesting account of
the ruins. Describing the house of the governor, he says:

    Besides these four buildings there is on the south of them, distant
    from them about an arquebus shot, another very large building built
    on a "Mul" or hill made by hand, with abundance of buttresses on
    the corners made of massive carved stones. The ascent of this "mul"
    is made with difficulty, since the staircase by which the ascent is
    made is now almost destroyed. The building which is raised on this
    "mul" is of extraordinary sumptuousness and grandeur, and like the
    others very fine and beautiful. It has on its front, which faces
    the east, many figures and bodies of men and of shields, and of
    forms like the eagle which are found on the arms of the Mexicans,
    as well as of certain characters and letters which the Maya Indians
    used in old time--all carved with so great dexterity as surely to
    excite admiration. The other façade, which faces the west, showed
    the same carving, although more than half the carved part had
    fallen. The ends stood firm and whole with their four corners much
    carved in the round, like those of the other building below.... The
    Indians do not know surely who built these buildings or when they
    were built, though some of them did their best in trying to explain
    the matter, but in doing so showed foolish fancies and dreams, and
    nothing fitted into the facts or was satisfactory. The truth is
    that to-day the place is called Uxmal, and an intelligent old
    Indian declared to the father delegate that according to what the
    ancients had said it was known that it was more than nine hundred
    years since the buildings were built.[59]

From this account there appears to be little doubt that at the time of
the conquest the great buildings of Uxmal were deserted and already
falling into ruins. In the minds of the Indians they were evidently
associated with the practice of their ancient religious rites at a much
later date, for one of the reasons given by the regidor when he applied
for a grant of the land upon which the ruins stand was that--

    It would prevent the Indians in those places from worshipping the
    devil in the ancient buildings which are there, having in them
    idols to which they burn copal, and performing other detestable
    sacrifices as they are doing every day notoriously and
    publicly.[61]

The ruins of Uxmal were probably venerated by the Indians up to a very
recent period, as in one of the chants used by the modern Maya of
southern Yucatan in their "Cha chac" or rain ceremony the "Noh Nah ti
Uxmal," "Great house of Uxmal," is introduced, which possibly refers to
the Casa del Gobernador, as this is the largest building among the
ruins.

  [Illustration: PLATE 23
                 POTTERY VASE FROM YALLOCH, GUATEMALA]


  EXPLANATION OF PLATE 23

    The ovoid vase shown in plate 23 is 11 inches high by 6-1/2 inches
    in diameter at its widest part. It is of very fine pottery, with
    decorations in red, black, and reddish yellow on a background of
    light yellow. The outer surface is divided by double black lines
    into three zones. The uppermost and narrowest zone contains,
    between a broad red band above and two narrow black bands below, a
    row of 10 glyphs surrounding the edge of the vase. The middle zone,
    the broadest, contains upon one side (unfortunately the decoration
    upon the other side has been almost obliterated by time or wear) a
    human figure, in a crouching position, the right hand extended, the
    left resting upon the ground. The face is in profile, and around
    the left eye is seen the ornament usually associated with the
    representation of a god. This may be intended to represent
    Schellhas's God D of the Codices, known as the Roman-nosed God,
    probably Itzamna, as this peculiar eye ornament is often associated
    with him. The headdress is exceedingly elaborate, projecting far in
    front of and behind the head, and is decorated with plumes of
    feathers. The whole figure strongly suggests the bas-relief on the
    side of the door of the altar at Palenque, which is undoubtedly a
    representation of the god Itzamna. The curious eye ornaments, the
    construction of the elaborate headdress, the contour, of the face,
    and the platted objects hanging down in front of and behind the
    chest, from the neck, are similar in both. The lowest zone is
    decorated with vases having handles at the sides, narrow necks, and
    flaring rims from which project flame-like tongues; on the outer
    surface of each is depicted an "Ahau" sign. The vases alternate
    with curious objects which might represent bales of merchandise;
    the whole, indeed, closely resembles the tribute count of some
    Aztec city.


  EXPLANATION OF PLATE 24

    The cylindrical vase shown in plate 24 is 6 inches in diameter by
    11 inches high. It is divided into three zones, the uppermost of
    which contains a single row of hieroglyphics, in fair preservation,
    between a broad red band above and two narrow black bands below.
    The middle zone, by far the broadest, contains two very spirited
    representations of the Long-nosed God, one on each side of the
    vase, done in red, black, white, and dark yellow. The Long-nosed
    God, called by Schellhas in his "Representation of Deities of the
    Maya Manuscripts" God B, is usually identified with Cuculcan, the
    feathered serpent; the Aztec Quetzalcoatl. This god is usually
    represented with a long pendulous nose and one or two projecting
    tusks, and is almost in variably associated with the serpent. The
    head of the god is often held between the serpent's open jaws, or
    has added to it a serpentine body; again the god may be encircled
    by intertwining serpents, or may hold the reptile's body in his
    hand, like a wand. Though the serpentine attributes of the god are
    in this instance conspicuous by their absence, and the tapir
    attributes are emphasized, there can be little doubt that the
    painting is meant to represent God B, as the long pendulous nose
    and projecting tusks are highly characteristic of that god. The
    lowest and narrowest zone of this vase is covered with alternating
    red and black lines.

  [Illustration: PLATE 24
                 POTTERY VASE FROM YALLOCH, GUATEMALA]

  [Illustration: PLATE 25
                 POTTERY VASE FROM YALLOCH, GUATEMALA]


  EXPLANATION OF PLATE 25

    The cylindrical vase shown in plate 25 is 7-1/2 inches in height by
    4-1/2 inches in diameter. The whole of the decoration upon it is in
    light and dark red on a light yellow background, and, like the two
    previously described vases, it is divided into three decorative
    zones. The uppermost zone contains a single row of glyphs, almost
    indecipherable, apparently from constant use of the vase before it
    was buried. The middle zone contains two very remarkable
    mythological creatures, one on each side, whose feather-covered
    bodies, long legs, and large feet are suggestive of the ostrich.
    The necks are long and covered with flame-like projections, and
    both they and the heads, with their huge elongated jaws, are
    evidently intended for those of feathered serpents. The lowest zone
    of the vase is narrow, and contains only a narrow and a broad red
    stripe.


  EXPLANATION OF PLATES 26, 27, AND 28

    The pottery cylinder shown in plates 26, 27, and 28 is 10-1/2
    inches high by 4 inches in diameter and is without a bottom. It is
    most exquisitely decorated in light and dark red and dark yellow on
    a light yellow background, and is also divided into three
    decorative zones. The uppermost zone contains only a single row of
    hieroglyphs, very much defaced, among which may still be recognized
    several of the Maya day signs. The middle zone, by far the
    broadest, is covered by a most intricate design, containing human
    and mythological figures and hieroglyphs, with ornamental plumes,
    plats, and pendants; the whole, owing to the partial obliteration
    of the design, being extremely difficult to make out. On one side
    is seen a highly conventional representation of what is undoubtedly
    intended for the feathered serpent, with tail bent around to join
    the upper part of the head. The feathered serpent appears to
    permeate all Maya art in this section of the Maya area; whether
    painted on pottery or stucco, or incised on bone, pottery, or other
    material, one encounters him at every step. The serpent rests upon
    a row of glyphs, very much defaced, and below this is a mass of
    bows, knots, plumes, and glyphs. Farther along is a fierce-faced
    human figure, probably a warrior, with lofty and elaborate
    headdress, ornamented with many long feather plumes. Between the
    warrior and the serpent is a row of eight cartouches, superimposed
    one upon the other, each containing glyphs, a good deal defaced,
    among which the "Ahau" sign may still be clearly made out. The
    opening glyph in this panel may refer to the katun 8 Ahau. This
    katun can end in 8 Ahau only once in 260 years, or twice in the
    ninth cycle, namely, on 9.0.0.0.0.8 Ahau, 3 Ceh, and on
    9.13.0.0.0.8 Ahau, 8 Uo; and it is reasonable to suppose that if
    this is a calendar record it refers to some date in the ninth
    cycle. Naranjo, the nearest ancient Maya city to Yalloch, was
    occupied for a period of approximately 12 katuns, or 240 years,[62]
    between 9.7.10.0.0 and 9.19.10.0.0; if this glyph, therefore,
    refers to a katun ending in 8 Ahau in the ninth cycle, the date
    9.13.0.0.0 is certainly indicated.


  [Illustration: PLATE 26
                 POTTERY CYLINDER FROM YALLOCH, GUATEMALA
                 (OTHER VIEWS IN PLATES 27 AND 28)]

  [Illustration: PLATE 27
                 POTTERY CYLINDER FROM YALLOCH, GUATEMALA
                 (OTHER VIEWS IN PLATES 26 AND 28)]

  [Illustration: PLATE 28
                 POTTERY CYLINDER FROM YALLOCH, GUATEMALA
                 (OTHER VIEWS IN PLATES 26 AND 27)]




AUTHORITIES CITED


      BRINTON, DANIEL G. The Maya chronicles. Brinton's Library
      Aboriginal American Literature, vol. I. Phila. 1882.

      CHARNAY, DÉSIRÉ. Voyage au Yucatan et au pays des Lacandons. _La
      Tour du Monde_, vol. XLVII, pp. 1-96; vol. XLVIII, pp. 33-48.
      Paris, 1884.

      COGOLLUDO, JUAN LOPEZ DE. Historia de Yucathan. Madrid, 1688.

      GANN, THOMAS. On exploration of two mounds in British Honduras.
      _Proc. Soc. Ant. London_, 2d ser., vol. XV, pp. 430-434. London,
      1894-95.
        ---- On the contents of some ancient mounds in Central America.
        Ibid., 2d ser., vol. XVI, pp. 308-317. London, 1896-97.
        ---- Mounds in northern Honduras. _Nineteenth Rept. Bur. Amer.
        Ethn._, pt. 2, pp. 655-692. Washington, 1900.

      JOYCE, THOMAS A. Mexican archæology. New York, 1914.

      LANDA, DIEGO DE. Relation des choses de Yucatan. Texte Espagnol et
      traduction Française. Published by Brasseur de Bourbourg. Paris,
      1864.

      MALER, TEOBERT. Researches in the central portion, of the
      Usumatsintla Valley. Pt. 2. _Mem. Peabody Mus._, vol. II, no. 2.
      Cambridge, 1903.
        ---- Explorations in the Department of Peten, Guatemala. _Mem.
        Peabody Mus._, vol. IV, no. 2. Cambridge, 1908.

      MAUDSLAY, A. P. Explorations in Guatemala. _Proc. Royal Geog.
      Soc._, vol. V, no. 4, pp. 185-204. London, 1883.

      MORLEY, SYLVANUS GRISWOLD. An introduction to the study of the
      Maya hieroglyphs. _Bull. 57_, _Bur. Amer. Ethn._ Washington, 1915.

      RELACION de la villa de Valladolid. _Actas Cong. Int. Amer._,
      Madrid, 1881. vol. II Madrid, 1884.

      RELACION de los pueblos de Popola y Sínsimato y Samíol. _Coleccion
      de documentos ineditos, relativos al descubrimiento, conquista y
      colonizacion de las posesiones Espanolas en America y Oceania._ 2d
      ser., vol. XIII. Madrid, 1900.

      SPINDEN, H. J. A study of Maya art. _Mem. Peabody Mus._, vol. VI.
      Cambridge, 1913.

      STEPHENS, JOHN L. Incidents of travel in Yucatan. Vols. I-II. New
      York, 1843.

      THOMAS, CYRUS. Day symbols of the Maya year. _Sixteenth Rep. Bur.
      Amer. Ethn._, pp. 205-264. Washington, 1897.

      TOZZER, ALFRED M. A preliminary study of the prehistoric ruins of
      Nakum, Guatemala. _Mem. Peabody Mus._, vol. V, no. 3. Cambridge,
      1913.
        ---- Comparative study of the Mayas and Lacandones. _Pub.
        Archæol. Inst. Amer._ New York, 1907.

      VILLAGUTIERRE, JUAN DE. Historia de la conquista de la provincia
      de el Itza ... a las provincias de Yucatan. [Madrid], 1701.




INDEX


                                                         Page

  AGRICULTURE, most important occupation of Indians,       20

  ALCOHOL, effect on Indian temperament,                   34

  AMULETS, worn by women,                                  19

  ANIMALS--
    Domestic, kept by ancient inhabitants,                 55
    kept for pets,                                         25

  ARTS OF THE ANCIENTS, fine examples discovered,          53


  BASKETS, making of,                                      30

  BLEEDING, favorite remedy,                               37

  BONES, measurements of,                                  51

  BRISTOL MUSEUM, objects from collection of,              13

  BRITISH HONDURAS, NORTHERN, geographical description of, 14

  BRITISH MUSEUM, objects from collection of,              13


  CANDLES, method of making,                               31

  CANOES--
    making of,                                             28
    used for trading along rivers,                         29

  CEREMONIES, the four principal,                          42

  CEREMONY, CHA CHAC, at ripening of corn, description,    42

  CHARMS worn by women,                                    19

  CHIEF--
    power practically absolute,                            35
    rarely dies natural death,                             35
    strongest subchief usually succeeds,                   35

  CHILDBIRTH, methods of facilitating,                     38

  CHILDREN, love for and disposition of,                   33

  CHRONOLOGY, three periods of Mayan civilization,         58

  CIGARETTES--
    making of,                                             30
    smoked by women,                                       17

  COOKING, native methods of,                              22

  COOKING UTENSILS, description of,                        27

  CORN--
    harvesting and storing of,                             20
    preparation of ground and planting of,                 20
    surplus sold or exchanged,                             20

  CORN HUSKS, wrappers for cigarettes,                     30

  CORN PLANTATION. _See_ Milpa.

  "CUHUN RIDGES"--
    description of,                                        14
    sites of ancient mounds,                               14
    sites of modern villages,                              14


  DEATH SENTENCE, how executed,                            35

  DIET--
    description of,                                        21
    maize staple article of, among ancient inhabitants,    55

  DISEASES--
    bleeding for,                                          37
    eye trouble, remedy for,                               38
    intestinal parasites,                                  37
    malaria,                                               36
    smallpox,                                              37
    venereal,                                              37
    whooping cough, remedy for,                            38

  DRESS--
    ancient inhabitants,                                   52
    ancient priests,                                       52
    ancient warriors,                                      52
    now principally English and American goods,            19

  DRUNKENNESS--
    curse of the Indians,                                  34
    not considered a disgrace,                             34


  FIRE, methods of making,                                 22

  FISH--
    methods of catching,                                   25
    varieties of,                                          25

  FISHING--
    harpooning at night,                                   25
    methods of,                                            25
    torch used in,                                         25

  FOOD--
    animals used as, by ancient inhabitants,               55
    kind and method of eating modified by contact with
       more civilized communities,                         22
    method of serving and eating,                          22
    preparation and serving of,                            21
    snakes used as,                                        24
    turtles' eggs used as,                                 24

  FOWLS, use of, in Cha chac ceremony,                     45

  FURNITURE--
    description of,                                        27
    hammocks conspicuous articles of,                      27


  GAME--
    pursuit of,                                            23
    traps used in capturing,                               24

  GAME BIRDS AND ANIMALS--
    list of,                                               24
    preparation and curing of, for future use,             21

  GAMES--
    of the ancient inhabitants,                            56
    played by adults and children,                         39


  HAMMOCKS--
    conspicuous articles of furniture,                     27
    hiding places for "cooties",                           27

  HEADDRESSES--
    ancient warriors and priests,                          52
    animals carved in wood,                                52

  HENEQUEN FIBER--
    method of cleaning,                                    30
    uses of,                                               31

  HOMES, not particular as to cleanliness of,              16

  HOOKWORMS, prevalent, due to earth-eating habits of
     children,                                             37

  HOUSES--
    ancient, description of,                               53
    built with assistance of neighbors,                    26
    method of construction,                                26

  HUNTING, torch used in,                                  24


  ICAICHE, estimate of population,                         13

  IMMORALITY, brought about by cheapness of rum,           33

  INDIANS, causes of early deaths,                         34

  ITZAS, occupying western British Honduras,               13


  LIVERPOOL MUSEUM, objects from collection of,            13


  MACAPAL--
    carried by children, causing bowlegs,                  16
    description of its use,                                15
    habits acquired by constant carrying of,               16
    weighted with stones as counterpoise in traveling,     16

  MACHETE, used as tool and weapon,                        28

  MALARIA--
    chief scourge of Indians,                              36
    treated by sweating,                                   36

  MARRIAGE--
    age of,                                                32
    all degrees of racial mixture,                         34
    ceremony often delayed,                                33
    Maya women to Negro men common,                        33
    not legal among Santa Cruz unless performed by
       certain official,                                   33
    obligation somewhat loose,                             33
    usually by Catholic priest,                            33

  MASSAGE, practiced by midwives,                          38

  MAYA, progenitors of present inhabitants,                15

  MEDICINE, list of plants used as,                        38

  MEN--
    cruelty of, often in nature of reprisal,               18
    dress of,                                              18
    example of cruelty of master to servant,               18
    have no desire to accumulate wealth,                   18
    mental characteristics of,                             17
    occupation of,                                         17
    skillful in finding routes and in following tracks,    18
    stoical in bearing pain,                               18

  METATE--
    superseded by hand mills,                              17
    use of,                                                21

  MILPA--
    many fruits and vegetables grown in,                   20
    preparation of,                                        20

  MOCCASINS, making of,                                    19

  MOSQUITOES, carriers of malaria,                         36

  MOUNDS--
    abundant on fertile soil,                              50
    classification of,                                     49
    contents indicate physical appearance of ancient
       inhabitants,                                        51
    manner of construction,                                65

  MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN, objects from collection
     of,                                                   13


  ODOR, peculiar,                                          16

  OILS, for cooking and lighting,                          31

  ORNAMENTS, worn by ancient inhabitants,                  52


  "PINE RIDGES," description of,                           14

  PLANTS, list of, used as medicine,                       38

  POTTERY--
    ancient, description of,                               54
    ancient, ornamentation of,                             54
    slight attempt at decoration,                          28

  POTTERY MAKING--
    exclusively by older women,                            28
    no polish, glaze, or paint applied,                    28
    rendered unnecessary by iron pots and earthenware,     17

  PROPERTY, disposition of, at death,                      33

  PUNISHMENT--
    fine, flogging, and death only methods of,             35
    for witchcraft or sorcery,                             36
    imprisonment as, unknown,                              35


  RELIGION--
    ancient inhabitants,                                   56
    Catholic priests not permitted for many years,         41
    Christianity a thin veneer,                            42
    four principal ceremonies,                             42
    human sacrifice by the ancient inhabitants,            57
    Indian conception of,                                  40
    native priests appointed,                              41

  RELIGIOUS ALTARS, draped and decorated,                  28

  RUM--
    made locally,                                          34
    women usually drink privately,                         34


  SANDALS, worn by ancient inhabitants,                    52

  SANTA CRUZ TRIBE--
    emigration of,                                         13
    estimate of population,                                13
    measurements of,                                       15
    physical description of,                               15
    policy of extermination of, by Mexican Government,     13

  SMALLPOX--
    terrible scourge,                                      37
    treatment for, often disastrous,                       37

  SNAKES USED AS FOOD,                                     24

  SPINNING--
    method of,                                             29
    no longer practiced,                                   17
    universal among ancient women,                         55

  SPIRITS, belief in,                                      40

  SUPERSTITION, "Santa Cruz" oracle,                       41

  SURGERY, practice of,                                    37


  TEETH, filed and filled with plugs,                      51

  TOBACCO--
    curing of,                                             30
    vanilla leaves mixed with, to give flavor and
       fragrance,                                          30

  TORCH USED IN FISHING,                                   25

  TORTILLAS, preparation and cooking of,                   21

  TRAPS USED IN CAPTURING GAME,                            24

  TURKEY, use of, in Cha chac ceremony,                    45


  VILLAGES--
    description of,                                        32
    foreigners not permitted to reside in,                 32
    frequent changes of sites,                             27
    locations of, carefully concealed,                     32


  WEAPONS--
    defensive, of ancient inhabitants,                     53
    offensive, of ancient inhabitants,                     52

  WEAVING--
    method of,                                             29
    no longer practiced,                                   17

  WOMEN--
    dress of,                                              19
    in gala costume present attractive appearance,         16
    industrious workers,                                   17
    jewelry and ornaments worn by,                         19
    obscene and disgusting language used by,               16
    occupation of,                                         17
    personal cleanliness of,                               16
    physically and mentally superior to men,               16
    social characteristics of,                             16


  YUCATAN, geographical description of,                    14

  YUCATECAN TRIBES, immigration into northern British
     Honduras,                                             13




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Que los indios eran muy dissolutos en bever y emboracharse,
de que les seguian muchos males, como matarse unos a otros, violar las
camas ... y pegar fuego a sus casas.--LANDA, _Relación de las Cosas de
Yucatan_, chap. XXII, p. 122.

[2] In 1859 a mission was dispatched by the superintendent of
British Honduras to the chiefs of the Santa Cruz, with the object of
rescuing Spanish prisoners held by them. The following account is from
"A narrative of a journey across the unexplored portion of British
Honduras, with a sketch of the history and resources of the colony," by
Henry Fowler, colonial secretary (Belize, 1879):

"That night as usual all the available Indians in Bacalar arrived in
front of the home where the Santa Cruz is kept. The boy attendants or
sentries on the idol, called angels, were in front of it and the drums
and bugles sounded at recurring parts of the song. The chief was inside
with the image and the angels. The subordinate chiefs and soldiers knelt
outside, and did not rise until the service was over, when they crossed
themselves and rubbed their foreheads in the dust. About 11 o'clock the
Indians were heard running backward and forward, and an order was given
to bring out the prisoners, who were placed in a line before the Santa
Cruz, and a large body of soldiers were placed with them. They all knelt
down in the road. There were about 40 female prisoners, with one arm
tied to the side, and 12 or 14 men pinioned by both arms. All were calm,
except the children, although it was known Santa Cruz was pronouncing
their doom. A squeaking whistling noise was heard issuing from the
oracle, and when it ceased it was known the Santa Cruz wanted a higher
ransom from the prisoners. * * *

"Some of the women and children were separated from the rest, amongst
whom was a young Spanish girl well known in high circles. A procession
was then formed and marched off to the east gate; first came a strong
body of troops, then alternately in Indian file, a male prisoner and his
executioner, who drove him on with his machete, holding him by a rope;
next came the women, 35 in number, driven and held in a similar manner;
then another body of soldiers closed the rear; the Englishmen were not
allowed to follow. The procession halted under a clump of trees about
150 yards off. And soon the butchery commenced; shrieks were heard, but
in 10 minutes all was over.

"The Santa Cruz was mixed up with some Catholic rites, but retains the
leading characteristics of the god who was best propitiated by placing
bleeding human hearts within his lips."

In 1863 the Icaichè were beaten by the Santa Cruz, and, says the
chronicler: "The account of the slaughter and human sacrifice made on
that occasion is appalling."

[3] "Los _chaces_ eran quatro hombres ancianos elegidos siempre
de nuevo para ayudar al sacerdote a bien y complidamente hazer las
fiestas."--LANDA, op. cit., chap. XXVII, p. 160.

[4] "En contrario llamavanse y se llaman oy los sacerdotes en
esta lengua de Maya _Ahkin_, que se deriva de un verbo _kinyah_, que
significa 'sortear ó echar suertes.'"--LANDA, ibid., p. 362.

[5] Landa, ibid., chaps. XXXV, p. 212; XXXVI, p. 222.

[6] Que estas gentes tuvieron mas de XX años de abundancia y de
salud y se multiplicaron tanto que toda la tierra parescia un pueblo, y
que entonces se labraron los templos en tanta muchedumbre, como se vee
oy en dia por todas partes y que atravesando por montes se veen entre
las arboledas assientos de casas y edificios labrados a
maravilla.--LANDA, op. cit., p. 58.

[7] Que en Años passados tuvieron quatro Batallas con los
Indios Aycales (que son los Mopanes) Chinamitas, y Tulunquies, y
Taxchinchán, Nob, y Acabob, Zuacuanob, Ahtimob, Teyucunob, Ahchemob,
Ahcamulob ... y que todas estas Naciones estavan viviendo juntas al
Leste, ú Oriente, y que de aquél I'eten, á sus Poblaciones, avia nueve
dias de Camino, que era el que ellos gastavan en ir á
ellas.--VILLAGUTIERRE, Historia de la conquista de la provincia de el
Itza, p. 554.

[8] Son en lo personal, estos Indios Itzaex, bien agestados;
color trigueño, mas claro que el de los de Yucatán. Son agiles, y de
buenos cuerpos, y rostros, aunque algunos se los rayavan, por señales de
valentia. Traian las Cabellaras largas, quanto pueden crezer: Y assi, es
lo mas dificultoso en los Indios el reduzirlos á cortarles el pelo;
porque el traerlo largo, es señal de Idolatria.--VILLAGUTIERRE, op.
cit., p. 498.

Que los Indios de Yucatan son bien dispuestos y altos y rezios y de
muchas fuercas.--LANDA, op. cit., p. 112.

[9] Que las indias criavan sus hijitos en toda asperaza y
desnudez del mundo, porque a cuatro o cinco dias nacida la criatura la
ponian tendidita en un lecho pequeño hecho de varillas, y allí boca
abaxo le ponian entre dos tablillas la cabeça, la una en el colodrillo,
y la otro en la frente, entre las quales se le appretavan reciamento y
le tenían allí padeciendo hasta que acabados algunos dias le quedava la
cabeça llana y enmoldada como lo usavan todos ellos.--LANDA, op. cit.,
p. 180.

[10] Sus vestiduras, de que vsavan, eran vnos Ayates, ó
Gabachas, sin Mangas, y sus Mantas, todo de Algodón texido de varios
colores: Y ellos y las Mugeres, vnas como Faxas, de lo mismo, de cosa de
quatro varas de largo, y vna tercia de ancho, con que se çeñian, y
cubrian las partes; y algunas al canto, ú orilla, mucha Plumeria de
colores, que era su mayor gala.--VILLAGUTIERRE, op. cit., p. 498.

[11] Tenian algunos señores y capitanes como moriones de palo y
estos eran pocos, y con estas armas ivan a la guerra, y con plumajes y
pellejos do tigres, y leones, puestos los que los tenían.--LANDA, op.
cit., p. 172.

[12] Y en las orillas de la Playa, solo se veían amontonadas la
multitud de Flechas, que la resaca de las olas avia llevado á Tierra. De
adonde se puede inferir, quan inmenso seria el numero de ellas, que los
Infieles arrojaron á los Pobres Christianos.--VILLAGUTIERRE, op. cit.,
p. 483.

[13] Estava en vn gran Salón, cuyos Techos eran de Paja, y las
Paredes de Cal, y Canto, de vna vara de alto, bruñidas, como el suelo, y
en ellas estrivava el Maderage de lo levantado en la
Casa.--VILLAGUTIERRE, op. cit., p. 392.

Estava poblada toda ella de Casas, alennas con Paredes de Piedra, de
cosa de mas de vara de alto, y de allí arriba Maderas, y los Techos de
Paja, y otras de solo Madera, Y Paja.--Ibid., 494.

[14] Enterravanlos dentro en sus casas o a las espaldas dellas,...
Comunmente desamparavan la casa y la dexavan yerma despues de
enterrados.--LANDA, op. cit., p. 196.

[15] Tienen atables pequeños que tañen con la mano, y otro
atabal de palo huero de sonido pesado y triste: tañenlo con un palo
larguillo puesto al cabo cierta leche de un arbol.--LANDA, op. cit., p.
124.

[16] The drum is composed of a clay jar about twenty inches
high. Over the top of the jar is stretched a piece of the hide of the
_tepeizquinte_ for a head. The whole drum is painted white. On one side
near the top there is a head similar in all respects to that found in
all the sacred ollas. This head, as it has been explained, represents
one of the lesser gods called Qaiyum.--TOZZER, A Comparative Study of
the Mayas and the Lacandones, p. 111.

[17] Crian aves para vender de Castilla, y de las suyas y para
comer. Crian paxaros para su recreacion y para las plumas para hazer sus
ropas galanas.--LANDA, op. cit., p. 190.

[18] Por lo qual se usava tener en cada pueblo una casa grande
y encalada, abierta por todas partes, en la qual se juntavan los mogos
para sus passatiempos. Jugavan a la pelota y a un juego con unas habas
como a los dados, y a otros muchos.--LANDA, op. cit., p. 178.

Two curious stones, which may have been used in some game, were
discovered in a small burial mound in the Orange Walk district of
British Honduras some years ago. They were made of nicely polished
crystalline limestone, about one foot in diameter, and shaped very much
like curling stones without handles. The upper part of each was
traversed by two round holes, about one inch in diameter, which passed
completely through the stone, near its summit, and crossed each other at
right angles.

[19] See Nineteenth Rep. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pl. XXX, fig. 8.

[20] Ibid., pl. XXIX, no. 3.

[21] A la primera vista encontraron con la Messa de los
Sacrificios, que era vna Piedra muy grande, de mas de dos varas y media
de largo, y vara y media de ancho, con doze assientos, que la rodeavan,
para los doze Sacerdotes, que executavan el Sacrificio.--VILLAGUTIERRE,
op. cit., p. 392; ibid., p. 457; ibid., 482.

[22] Que sin las fiestas en las quales, para la solemnidad de
ellas, se sacrificavan animales, también por alguna tribulacion o
necessidad, les mandava el sacredote o chilanes sacrificar personas, y
para esto contribuian todos, para que se comprasse esclavos, o algunos
de devocion davan sus hijitos los quales eran muy regalados hasta et dia
y fiesta de sus personas, y muy guardados que no se huyessen o
ensuziassen de algun carnal peccado, y mientras a ellos llevavan de
pueblo en pueblo con vailes, ayunavan los sacerdotes y chilanes y otros
officiates--LANDA, op. cit., p. 164.

[23] Mas de todas las cosas que aver podian que son aves del
cielo, animales de la tierra, o pescados de la agua, siempre les
embadurnavan los rostros al demonio con la sangre dellos. Y otras cosas
que tenían ofrocian; a algunos animales les sacavan el corazon y lo
ofrecían, a otros enteros, unos vivos, otros muertos, unos crudos, otros
guisados, y hazian también grandes ofrendas de pan y vino, y de todas
las maneras de comidas, y bevidas que usavan.--LANDA, op. cit., pp.
162-164.

[24] Recent examination of the Tuluum Stela has brought to
light upon it, in two places, the glyph representing the lahuntum, and
the date 7 Ahau; now 7 Ahau occurs as a lahuntun ending in 10.6.10.0.0
(approximately 695 A. D. of our era) which is almost certainly the
contemporaneous date of the Stela.

[25] Tenian lanquelas cortas de un estado con los hierros de
fuerte pedernal.... Tenian para su defensa rodelas que hazian de cañas
hendidas, y muy texidas redondas y guarnecidas de cueros de
venados.--LANDA, op. cit., pp. 170-172.

[26] Figured in Nineteenth Rep. Bur. Amer. Ethn., pl. XXXIV,
No. 5.

[27] Otras, se harpavan lo superfluo del miembro vergonçoso,
dexandolo como las orejas, de lo qual se engaño el historiador general
de las Indias, diziendo que se circumcídian. Otras vezes hazian un suzio
y penoso sacrificio añudandose los que lo hazian en el templo, donde
puestos en rengla, se hazian sendos agujeros en los miembros viriles al
soslayo por el lado, y hechos passavan toda la mas cantidad de hilo que
podian quedando assi todos asídos, y ensartados; también untavan con la
sangre de todas estas partes al demonio y el que mas hazia, por mas
valiente era tenido.--LANDA, op. cit., p. 162.

[28] Gann, Mounds in Northern Honduras.

[29] These large round ear plugs seem to have been universally
worn; they are found in the paintings, on figurines, and on the
incensarios. The plug may be funnel shaped or flat, plain, or decorated
with a stud, rosette, or tassel. Describing the ear ornaments worn by
the Itzas, Villagutierre says: "Si bien muchos de ollos rayadas las
caras, y abujereadas las orejas.... Y que algunos Indios traían puestas,
en las orejas que traíā, ynas Rosas de Plata, y otros las traían de Oro;
y otros de Oro, y Plata."--VILLAGUTIERRE, op. cit., pp. 402-403.

Landa, speaking of the Maya women, says: "Horadavanse las orejas, para
ponerse zarzilloa al modo de sus maridos."--LANDA, op. cit., p. 182.

[30] Figurines of animals with human heads projecting from
their widely opened jaws are common in this area. The turtle, alligator,
tiger, shark, and snake are usually the animals selected. Thomas says of
this figure: "If we may judge from its use there is no doubt that the
Mexican _cipactli_ figure is a symbol of the earth or underworld. The
usual form of the day symbol in the Mexican codices is shown in plate
LXIV, 16, and more elaborately in plate LXIV, 17." [These correspond
almost exactly with some of the figurines found.] "As proof that it
indicates the earth, or underworld, there is shown on plate 73 of the
Borglan Codex an individual, whose heart has been torn from his breast,
plunging downward through the open jaws of the monster into the shade of
the earth below.... It is therefore more than likely that the animal
indicated by the Mexican name of the day is mythical, represented
according to locality by some known animal which seems to indicate best
the mythical conception. Some figures evidently refer to the alligator,
and others apparently to the iguana; that on plates 4 and 5 of the
Dresden Codex is purely mythical."--THOMAS, Day Symbols of the Maya
Year, p. 212.

Spinden explains these part human, part animal, monsters differently. He
regards the human face as symbolical of the human mind contained within
the animal body of the god.--A Study of Maya Art, pp. 35 and 62.

[31] Figured in pl. XXXVIII of the Nineteenth Rep. Bur. Amer.
Ethn., as the Great Central Lookout Mound.

[32] Landa, in mentioning the beardlessness of the Yucatecans
at the time of the conquest, says it was reported as being brought about
by applying hot cloths to the chins of the children. This seems
improbable. "No criavan barbas, y dezian que les quemavan los rostros
sus madres con paños calientes, siendo niños, por que no les naciessen,
y que agora crian barbas aunque muy asperas como cerdas de
tocines."--LANDA, op. cit., p. 114.

The pure-blood Indians of the present day have but a very scanty growth
of hair on the face and pubes, and in some cases even the few straggling
hairs which they possess are pulled out.

[33] "Tenian por costumbre averrarse los dientes dexandolos
como diente de sierra y esto tenían por galanteria, y hazian este
officio viejas, limandolos con ciertas piedras y agua."--LANDA, op.
cit., p. 182. Similarly filed teeth have been discovered at Copan and in
caves at Loltun. See Joyce, Mexican Archæology, p. 294.

[34] Tozzer, in commenting on these chultuns at Nakum, says:
"There is evidently no close connection, as in Yucatan, between the
water supply and these underground rooms. In fact they are frequently
found near sites where there is an abundant supply of water throughout
the year. In almost no case do we find any drainage into them. They are
usually found on ground slightly higher than that of the surrounding
country. In this respect they differ from those in Yucatan. Another
point against their use as storage for water is shown in the fact that
in several the rock from which they are excavated is porous, and the
walls do not seem in all cases to have been covered with an impervious
layer of plaster. That they were used in some cases for the storage of
maize and other foods is possible, as they are generally dry and would
be suitable for such a purpose. That some were used for burial places is
very probable."--TOZZER, A Preliminary Study of the Prehistoric Ruins of
Nakum, Guatemala, p. 191.

[35] Gann: On Exploration of Two Mounds in British Honduras,
pp. 430-434; On the Contents of Some Ancient Mounds in Central America,
pp. 308-317.

[36] Gann, Mounds in Northern Honduras, pp. 666-680.

[37] The interments which are found, superficially placed in
mounds which cover buildings, were probably of later date, as Landa
distinctly states that the owner was buried within his house.
"Enterravanlos dentro en sus casas o a las espaldas dellas" (Landa, op
cit., p. 196). Moreover, more than one of these superficial interments
are found in mounds covering buildings, and, lastly, human remains have
been found beneath the floors of ruined houses, where one would
naturally expect to find them.

[38] From Wilson, Daniel, Prehistoric Man, vol. I, pp. 214-15,
Cambridge and London, 1862; quoted by Stevens, Edward T., in Flint
Chips.

[39] This shell has already been reproduced in the Sixteenth
Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, pl. LXIX.

[40] Similar grafiti were discovered on the wall of a temple at
Nakum, in Guatemala. See Tozzer, Preliminary Study of the Prehistoric
Ruins of Nakum, Guatemala, p. 160, fig. 48a.

[41] Maler, Explorations in the Department of Peten, Guatemala,
pp. 100-101.

[42] See Spinden, Maya Art, p. 64.

[43] See _Memoirs of the Peabody Museum_, vol. II, No. 1,
Researches in the Valley of the Usumatsintla, where on several
illustrations rows of similar shells are seen decorating the edges of
the garments of the persons represented.

[44] It is curious that neither Landa nor Villagutierre
mentions this ornamental plugging of the front teeth, as, judging by the
number of teeth found, it can not have been of exceptionally rare
occurrence. Landa, who describes their ornaments very closely, mentions
the filling of the teeth, but not the plugging, which, had it been in
vogue at the time of the conquest in Yucatan, he must have heard about
or observed. It seems probable that the custom had already become
obsolete before the first appearance of the Spaniards in Yucatan.

[45] See Spinden, Maya Art, fig. 79.

[46] The photographs of the torso and headdress were taken in
England and those of the head in British Honduras. Consequently they do
not fit together as well as do the originals.

[47] It would appear that these thick woven or plaited cotton
breastplates were fortified with salt.

Landa, op. cit., p. 48: "Y sus rodelas y iacos fuertes de sal y
algodon."

Ibid. p. 172: "Hazian xacos de algodon colchados y de sal por moler
colchada de dos tandas o colchaduras, y estos eran fortissimos."

[48] MORLEY, An Introduction to the Study of the Maya
Hieroglyphs, p. 15.

[49] Accounts of the finding of these incense burners and of
copal are common in both ancient and modern times. "Hallé en una de las
dos Capillas cacao ofrecido, y señal de copal (que es su incienso) de
poco tiempo allí quemado, y que lo era de alguna supersticion, ó
idolatria recién cometida."--COGOLLUDO, Historia de Yucathan, Bk. IV,
Cap. VII, p. 193.

"Y los que ivan tenían de costumbre de entrar también en templos
derelictos, quando passavan por ellos a orar y quemar copal."--LANDA,
op. cit., p. 158.

"While searching the upper steps of the pyramid my men found two
interesting incense vessels with a head on the rim."--MALER, Researches
in the Central Portion of the Usumatsintla Valley, Part 2, p. 136.

"In nearly all the houses (speaking of Yaxchilan) I found earthen pots,
partly filled with some half-burned resinous substance.... They were in
great numbers round the idol in the house I lived in. Some looked much
newer than others, and many are in such positions that it was clear that
they had been placed there since the partial destruction of the
houses."--MAUDSLAY, Explorations in Guatemala, pp. 185-204.

CHARNAY, Voyage au Yucatan et au pays des Lacandons, pp. 33-48.

"Se trouvent une multitude de vases d'une terre grossière, et d'une
forme nouvelle; ce sont des bols de dix à quinze centimètres de diamètre
sur cinq à six de hauteur, dont les bords sont ornés de masques humains
représentant des figures camardes et d'autres à grands nez busqués,
véritables caricatures où l'art fait complètement défaut.... Ces vases
servaient de brûle-parfums, et la plupart sont encore à moitié pleins de
copal."--CHARNAY, Ibid., p. 88.

[50] "These incense-burners are used by the Lacandones in their
religious ceremonies. Each family or group of connected families living
together possesses several of the incense-burners or
_braseros_."--TOZZER, Comparative Study of the Mayas and Lacandones, p.
84.

[51] "Y las dos mas grandes, de Comunidad, y la otra, aùn mas
grande, que todas las otras, era el Adoratorio de los perversos Idolos
de aquellos Lacandones, donde se hallaron muchos de ellos, de formas
raras, como assimismo cantidad de Gallinas muertas, Brasseros, con
señales de aver quemado Copal; y aùn se hallaron las cenizas calientes,
y otras diversas, ridiculas, y abominables cosas, pertenecientes à la
execuccion de sus perversos Ritos, y Sacrificios."--VILLAGUTIERRE, op.
cit., p. 264.

[52] See TOZZER, op. cit., p. 87: "If we consider the type of
bowl with the knob-like projection as a transition form, we are led to
the conclusion that the most primitive form of incense burner was the
bowl on which was represented the whole body at first, and then the head
of a person or animal."

Ibid., p. 91: "The Lacandones assert that in former times the incense
burners were made in other forms, some possessing arms and legs. These
are seldom made or used now."

[53] These face-decorated bowls were in use as incense burners
among the Mayas of Valladolid, very shortly after the conquest. See
Relación de la villa de Valladolid, p. 185: "Adoraban unos ídolos hechos
de barro á manera do jarillos y de macetas de albahaca, hechos en ellos
de la parte de afuera rostros desemejados, quemaban dentro de estos una
resina llamada _copal_, de gran olor. Esto les ofrecían á estos ídolos,
y ellos cortaban en muchas partes de sus miembros y ofrecían aquella
sangre."

See also Relación de los pueblos de Popola, y Sínsimato y Samíol, pp.
44-45: "Usaban de adorar unos jarrillos hechos en ellos rostros
desemejados, teniandolos por sus ydolos quemavan dentro y ofresian una
resina llamada copal ques como trementina elada, de gran olor, y se
cortavan en muchas partes para ofrecer la sangre a aquél ydolo."

[54] "Que en muriendo la persona, para sepultar el cuerpo le
doblan las piernas y ponen la cara sobre las rodillas ... abren en
tierra un hoyo redondo."--COGOLLUDO, op. cit., Bk. XII, Chap. VII, p.
699.

[55] Among the modern Maya Indians of this area food is no
longer placed with the dead, but every _Hanal pishan_, or All Souls'
Day, tortillas, posol, meat, and other foods are placed upon the graves,
on the odor of which the soul of the departed is supposed to regale
itself. Tozzer mentions the custom of burying food with the dead as
still practiced by the modern Lacandones. (See TOZZER, A comparative
Study of the Mayas and the Lacandones, pp. 47-48.)

See also COGOLLUDO, op. cit., Bk. XII, Chap. VII, p. 699: "Al rededor le
ponen mucha vianda, una xicara, un calabaço con atole, salvados de maiz,
y unas tortillas grandes de lo mismo, que han llevado juntamente con el
cuerpo, y assi lo cubren despues con tierra."

[56] This practice of burying with the dead some of their
belongings is mentioned both by Landa and Villagutierre.

"Enterravanlos dentro en sus casas o a las espaldas dellas, echandoles
en la sepultura algunos de sus ídolos, y si era sacerdote algunos de sus
libros, y si hechizero de sus piedras de hechizos y peltrechos."--LANDA,
op. cit., p. 196.

"Tenian por costumbre estos Indios, de sepultar los Difuntos en los
Campos, à corta distancia del Pueblo, y poner sobre las Sepulturas de
los Varones Banquitos, Puquietes, y otras cosas del uso varonil; y sobre
las de las Mugeres, Piedras de moler, Ollas, Xicaras, y otros trastos à
esto modo."--VILLAGUTIERRE, op. cit., p. 313.

[57] This white lime wash, applied evenly to the entire
surface, over which other colors were afterward painted, seems to have
been used on all the more elaborate incensarios and on nearly all the
clay figurines. It is still employed by the modern Lacandones in the
manufacture of their _braseros_. (See TOZZER, A comparative Study of the
Mayas and the Lacandones, p. 109.)

[58] Speaking of the boundaries of the territory of the Itzaex,
Villagutierre (op. cit., p. 489), gives the sea as its eastern limit.
All the tribes between the lagoon of Itza and the sea were evidently not
subject to the Itzaex, however, as he mentions (Lib. IX, cap. III, p.
554) a number of tribes inhabiting this area with whom they were at war,
and states (Lib. VI, Cap. IV, p. 352) that the Mopanes and Tipu Indians
were not subject to the Canek of Itza.

[59] Brinton, The Maya Chronicles, p. 87.

[60] Relación Breve, quoted by Spinden, A Study of Maya Art,
pp. 7-8.

[61] Stephens, Incidents of Travel in Yucatan, vol. I, p. 323.

[62] Morley, An Introduction to the Study of the Maya
Hieroglyphs, p. 15.




Transcriber's notes:

Different spelling of (e.g.) Yucatan and Yucatán result from usage of
different languages (English, Spanish).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Maya Indians of Southern Yucatan
and Northern British Honduras, by Thomas William Francis Gann

